very forbearing and modest, the suffering becomes so much the more easily
borne. But if he is bold and boastful and vainglorious, a daily death would be
desirable for the other; he will so embitter his life, insulting him to his face, and
laughing at him behind his back, wresting much of his authority from him, and
wishing to be everything himself. But he is possessed of the greatest security, in
all these circumstances, who has fluency in preaching, and the earnest attention
of the multitude about him, and the affection of all those who are under his
charge. Do you not know what a passion for sermons has burst in upon the
minds of Christians now-a-days? And that they who practice themselves in
preaching are in special honor, not only among the heathen, but among them of
the household of the faith? How then could any one bear such disgrace as to find
that all are mute when he is preaching, and think that they are oppressed, and
wait for the end of the sermon, as for some release from work; while they listen
to another with eagerness though he preach long, and are sorry when he is about
to conclude; and almost angry when it is his purpose to be silent. If these matters
seem to you to be small, and easily to be despised, it is because of your
inexperience. They are truly enough to quench zeal, and to paralyze the powers
of the mind, unless a man withdraw himself from all human passions, and study
to frame his conduct after the pattern of those incorporeal powers, who are
neither pursued by envy, nor by longing for fame, nor by any other morbid
feeling. If then there be any man so constituted as to be able to subdue this wild
beast, so difficult to capture, so unconquerable, so fierce; that is to say, public
fame, and to cut off its many heads, or rather to forbid their growth altogether;
he will easily be able to repel these many violent assaults, and to enjoy a kind of
quiet haven of rest. But he who has not freed himself from this monster, involves
his soul in struggles of various kinds, and perpetual agitation, and the burden
both of despondency and of other passions. But why need I detail the rest of
these difficulties, which no one will be able to describe, or to learn unless he has
had actual experience of them.

## On the Priesthood — Book VI
1. Our condition here, indeed, is such as you have heard. But our condition
hereafter how shall we endure, when we are compelled to give our account for
each of those who have been entrusted to us? For our penalty is not limited to
shame, but everlasting chastisement awaits us as well. As for the passage, "Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit to them, for they watch in behalf of
your souls as they that shall give account;" [Hebrews 13:17] though I have
mentioned it once already, yet I will break silence about it now, for the fear of its
warning is continually agitating my soul. For if for him who causes one only,
and that the least, to stumble, it is profitable that "a great millstone should be
hanged about his neck, and that he should be sunk in the depth of the sea;"
[Matthew 18:6] and if they who wound the consciences of the brethren, sin
against Christ Himself, [1 Corinthians 8:12] what then will they one day suffer,
what kind of penalty will they pay, who destroy not one only, or two, or three,
but so many multitudes? For it is not possible for inexperience to be urged as an
excuse, nor to take refuge in ignorance, nor for the plea of necessity or force to
be put forward. Yea, if it were possible, one of those under their charge could
more easily make use of this refuge for his own sins than bishops in the case of
the sins of others. Do you ask why? Because he who has been appointed to
rectify the ignorance of others, and to warn them beforehand of the conflict with
the devil which is coming upon them, will not be able to put forward ignorance
as his excuse, or to say, "I have never heard the trumpet sound, I did not foresee
the conflict." For he is set for that very purpose, says Ezekiel, that he may sound
the trumpet for others, and warn them of the dangers at hand. And therefore his
chastisement is inevitable, though he that perishes happen to be but one. "For if
when the sword comes, the watchman does not sound the trumpet to the people,
nor give them a sign, and the sword come and take any man away, he indeed is