FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.111, C.5.

those that surpass the power of nature---e.g. that a fisherman should
be replete with the word of wisdom and of knowledge and the like;
and such as these are here set down as gratuitous graces.
Reply to Objection 2: Faith is enumerated here under the gratuitous
graces, not as a virtue justifying man in himself, but as implying a
super-eminent certitude of faith, whereby a man is fitted for
instructing others concerning such things as belong to the faith.
With regard to hope and charity, they belong to the appetitive power,
according as man is ordained thereby to God.
Reply to Objection 3: The grace of healing is distinguished from the
general working of miracles because it has a special reason for
inducing one to the faith, since a man is all the more ready to believe
when he has received the gift of bodily health through the virtue of
faith. So, too, to speak with divers tongues and to interpret speeches
have special efficacy in bestowing faith. Hence they are set down as
special gratuitous graces.
Reply to Objection 4: Wisdom and knowledge are not numbered
among the gratuitous graces in the same way as they are reckoned
among the gifts of the Holy Ghost, i.e. inasmuch as man's mind is
rendered easily movable by the Holy Ghost to the things of wisdom
and knowledge; for thus they are gifts of the Holy Ghost, as stated
above (Question 68, Articles 1,4). But they are numbered amongst
the gratuitous graces, inasmuch as they imply such a fullness of
knowledge and wisdom that a man may not merely think aright of
Divine things, but may instruct others and overpower adversaries.
Hence it is significant that it is the "word" of wisdom and the "word"
of knowledge that are placed in the gratuitous graces, since, as
Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1), "It is one thing merely to know what
a man must believe in order to reach everlasting life, and another
thing to know how this may benefit the godly and may be defended
against the ungodly."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.111, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether gratuitous grace is nobler than

sanctifying grace?
Objection 1: It would seem that gratuitous grace is nobler than
sanctifying grace. For "the people's good is better than the individual
good," as the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 2). Now sanctifying grace is
ordained to the good of one man alone, whereas gratuitous grace is
ordained to the common good of the whole Church, as stated above
(Articles 1,4). Hence gratuitous grace is nobler than sanctifying
grace.
Objection 2: Further, it is a greater power that is able to act upon
another, than that which is confined to itself, even as greater is the
brightness of the body that can illuminate other bodies, than of that
which can only shine but cannot illuminate; and hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) "that justice is the most excellent of
the virtues," since by it a man bears himself rightly towards others.
But by sanctifying grace a man is perfected only in himself; whereas
by gratuitous grace a man works for the perfection of others. Hence
gratuitous grace is nobler than sanctifying grace.
Objection 3: Further, what is proper to the best is nobler than what is
common to all; thus to reason, which is proper to man is nobler than
to feel, which is common to all animals. Now sanctifying grace is
common to all members of the Church, but gratuitous grace is the
proper gift of the more exalted members of the Church. Hence
gratuitous grace is nobler than sanctifying grace.
On the contrary, The Apostle (1 Cor. 12:31), having enumerated the
gratuitous graces adds: "And I shew unto you yet a more excellent
way"; and as the sequel proves he is speaking of charity, which
pertains to sanctifying grace. Hence sanctifying grace is more noble
than gratuitous grace.
I answer that, The higher the good to which a virtue is ordained, the
more excellent is the virtue. Now the end is always greater than the
means. But sanctifying grace ordains a man immediately to a union
with his last end, whereas gratuitous grace ordains a man to what is
preparatory to the end; i.e. by prophecy and miracles and so forth,
men are induced to unite themselves to their last end. And hence
sanctifying grace is nobler than gratuitous grace.