#### Sed contra

On the contrary, according to the Philosopher, everything known by us takes its origin from
sense knowledge: but God is absolutely remote from sense experience; therefore He is not first
known by us, but is known last.

Again, according to the Philosopher, those things that are posterior, according to nature, are first
known as far as we are concerned; and those things which are less knowable in themselves are
better known as far as we are concerned. But created things are posterior and less knowable by
nature than is God Himself; therefore, by us, He is known after creatures.

Again, what is promised as an ultimate reward does not come first, preceding everything done to
deserve it: but knowledge of God is promised to us as the ultimate reward of all cognition and
action; therefore God is not the first object known by us.

Response. I answer that it must be said: There are those who declare that the first object known
by the human mind even in this life is God Himself, who is first truth and the one through whom
all other things are known. But this is evidently false, since to know God through His essence
constitutes the beatitude of man; wherefore it would follow that every man would be blessed.

Moreover, since in the divine essence all things said of it are one, no one would err in regard to
anything he said concerning GodÑa thing which from experience is evidently false; furthermore,
since things first in the comprehension of the intellect ought to be most certainly known, the
intellect would be certain that it knew them; but it is clear that this is not the case in the
proposition (as to knowing God).

This position is also repugnant to the authority of Scripture (Exod. 33:20): "Man shall not see
Me and live."

Hence there are others who say that the divine essence is not the first thing known by us in this
life, but the influx of its light is, and in this way God is the first object known by us.

But this claim cannot be held; for the first influx of divine light in the mind is the natural light by
which the power of intellectual life is constituted. This light, however, is not at first known by
the mind; neither by cognition by which is known what this light is, since much investigation is
required to know the essence of the intellect; nor by cognition by which is known whether such a
light exists; for we do not perceive that we possess intellect, except inasmuch as we perceive that
we understand, as is clear from the Philosopher's words in IX Ethic. For no one knows that he
understands anything, save inasmuch as he understands something intelligible. From this it is
evident that cognition of an intelligible object-precedes cognition by which one knows that he
himself understands, and consequently precedes the cognition by which he knows that he
possesses an intellect; and so the influx of the natural light of intelligence cannot be the first thing
known by us; and much less can any other kind of influx of light be the first thing known.
Therefore it must be said that "the first thing known to man" is a phrase which can be understood
in two ways: either according to the order of diverse potencies, or according to the order of
objects in some one potency.