And in the case of a house, we seek what is good for it, and we would not endure
to see it decaying with age, or tottering, or hurt by storms: but for our soul we
make no account: nay, even should we see its foundations rotting, or the fabric
and the roof, we make no account of it. Again, if we possess brute creatures, we
seek what is good for them: we call in both horse-feeders and horse-doctors, and
all besides: we attend to their housing, and charge those who are entrusted with
them, that they may not drive them at random or carelessly, nor take them out by
night at unseasonable hours nor sell away their provender; and there are many
laws laid down by us for the good of the brute creatures: but for that of our soul
there is no account taken. But why speak I of brute creatures which are useful to
us? There are many who keep small birds (or "sparrows") which are useful for
nothing except that they simply amuse, and there are many laws even about
them, and nothing is neglected or without order, and we take care for everything
rather than for our own selves. Thus we make our selves more worthless than all.
And if indeed a person abusively call us "dog," we are annoyed: but while we
are opprobrious to ourselves, not in word, but in deed, and do not even bestow as
much care on our soul as on dogs, we think it no great harm. Do you see how all
is full of darkness? How many are careful about their dogs, that they may not be
filled with more than the proper food, that so they may be keen and fit for
hunting, being set on by famine and hunger: but for themselves they have no
care to avoid luxury: and the brute creatures indeed they teach to exercise
philosophy, while they let themselves sink down into the savageness of the
brutes. The thing is a riddle. "And where are your philosophic brutes?" There are
such; or, say, do you not take it to be philosophy, when a dog gnawed with
hunger, after having hunted and caught his prey, abstains from the food; and
though he sees his meal ready before him, and with hunger urging him on, yet
waits for his master? Be ashamed of yourselves: teach your bellies to be as
philosophic. You have no excuse. When you have been able to implant such
philosophic self-command in an irrational nature, which neither speaks nor hears
reason, shall you not much more be able to implant it in yourself? For that it is

the effect of man's care, not of nature is plain: since otherwise all dogs ought to
have this habit. Do you then become as dogs. For it is you that compel me to
fetch my examples thence: for indeed they should be drawn from heavenly
things; but since if I speak of those, you say, "Those are (too) great," therefore I
speak nothing of heavenly things: again, if I speak of Paul, you say, "He was an
Apostle:" therefore neither do I mention Paul: if again I speak of a man, you say,
"That person could do it:" therefore I do not mention a man even, but a brute
creature; a creature too, that has not this habit by nature, lest you should say that
it effected this by nature, and not (which is the fact) from choice: and what is
wonderful, choice not self-acquired, but (the result of) your care. The creature
does not give a thought to the fatigue, the wear and tear it has undergone in
running down the prey, not a thought to this, that by its own proper toil it has
made the capture: but casting away all these regards, it observes the command of
its master, and shows itself superior to the cravings of appetite. "True; because it
looks to be praised, it looks to get a greater meal." Say then to yourself, that the
dog through hope of future pleasure, despises that which is present: while you do
not choose for hope of future good things to despise those which are present; but
he indeed knows, that, if he tastes of that food at the wrong time and against his
master's will, he will both be deprived of that, and not get even that which was
apportioned to him, but receive blows instead of food: whereas you cannot even
perceive this, and that which he has learned by dint of custom, you do not
succeed in acquiring even from reason. Let us imitate the dogs. The same thing
hawks also and eagles are said to do: what the dogs do with regard to hares and
deer, the same do those with regard to birds; and these too act from a philosophy
learned from men. These facts are enough to condemn us, these enough to
convict us. To mention another thing:— they that are skilled in breaking horses,
shall take them, wild, fierce, kicking, biting, and in a short time so discipline
them, that though the teacher be not there, it is a luxury to ride them, their paces
are so thoroughly well-ordered: but the paces of the soul may be all disordered,
and none cares for it: it bounds, and kicks, and its rider is dragged along the