immortal. For, even after that, she asserted herself to be unbegotten and of the
essence of God, through the corrupt mouth of the Manicheans , and it was this
distemperature which gave occasion to her invention of the Grecian gods. On
this account, as it seems to me, God made virtue laborious, with a view to bow
down the soul and to bring it to moderation. And that you may convince yourself
that this is true, (as far as from trifles ones may guess at any thing great,) let us
learn it from the Israelites. They, it is well known, when they led not a life of toil
but indulged in relaxation, not being able to bear prosperity, fell away into
ungodliness. What then did God upon this? He laid upon them a multitude of
laws with a view to restrain their licence. And to convince you that these laws
contribute not to any virtue, but were given to them as a sort of curb, providing
them with an occasion of perpetual labor; hear what says the prophet concerning
them; "I gave them statutes which were not good." Ezek. xx. 25. What means,
"not good?" Such as did not much contribute towards virtue. Wherefore he adds
also, "and ordinances whereby they shall not live."
10. "But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit."
For as with these eyes no man could learn the things in the heavens; so
neither the soul unaided the things of the Spirit. And why speak I of the things in
heaven? It receives not even those in earth, all of them. For beholding afar off a
square tower, we think it to be round; but such an opinion is mere deception of
the eyes: so also we may be sure, when a man by means of his understanding
alone examines the things which are afar off much ridicule will ensue. For not
only will he not see them such as indeed they are, but will even account them the
contraries of what they are. Wherefore he added, "for they are foolishness unto
him." But this comes not of the nature of the things, but of his infirmity, unable
as he is to attain to their greatness through the eyes of his soul.
11. Next, pursuing his contrast, he states the cause of this, saying, "he
knows not because they are spiritually discerned:" i.e. the things asserted require
faith, and to apprehend them by reasonings is not possible, for their magnitude
exceeds by a great deal the meanness of our understanding. Wherefore he says,

"but he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man."
For he that has sight, beholds himself all things that appertain to the man that has
no sight; but no sightless person discerns what the other is about. So also in the
case before us, our own matters and those of unbelievers, all of them we for our
part know; but ours, they know not henceforth any more. We know what is the
nature of things present, what the dignity of things to come; and what some day
shall become of the world when this state of things shall be no more, and what
sinners shall suffer, and the righteous shall enjoy. And that things present are
nothing worth, we both know, and their meanness we expose; (for to "discern" is
also to expose;) ([ἀνακρίνειν, ἐλέγχειν]) and that the things to come are immortal
and immoveable. All these things are known to the spiritual man; and what the
natural man shall suffer when he is departed into that world; and what the
faithful shall enjoy when he has fulfilled his journey from this: none of which
are known to the natural man.
12. Wherefore also, subjoining a plain demonstration of what had been
affirmed, he says, "For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may
instruct Him? But we have the mind of Christ." That is to say, the things which
are in the mind of Christ, these we know, even the very things which He wills
and has revealed. For since he had said, "the Spirit had revealed them;" lest any
one should set aside the Son, he subjoins that Christ also showed us these things.
Not meaning this, that all the things which He knows, we know; but that all the
things which we know are not human so as to be open to suspicion, but of His
mind and spiritual.
For the mind which we have about these things we have of Christ; that is,
the knowledge which we have concerning the things of the faith is spiritual; so
that with reason we are "judged of no man." For it is not possible that a natural
man should know divine things. Wherefore also he said, "For who has known
the mind of the Lord?" implying that our own mind which we have about these
things, is His mind. And this, "that he may instruct Him," he has not added
without reason, but with reference to what he had just now said, "the spiritual