heaven," is to show that the vengeance comes from the judgment-seat on high:
that it is in the form of a sickle, denotes the inevitableness of the doom: for just
as the sickle, where it comes and has hooked the neck, is not drawn back with
nothing but itself, but with the head reaped off, even so the vengeance which
comes upon the swearers is severe, and will not desist until it have completed its
work. But if we swear and escape, let us not be confident; this is but to our woe.
For what think ye? How many, since Ananias and Sapphira, have dared the same
with them? How is it then, say you, that they have not met with the same fate?
Not because it was allowed in them, but because they are reserved for a greater
punishment. For those who often sin and are not punished, have greater reason to
fear and dread than if they were punished. For the vengeance is increased for
them by their present impunity and the long-suffering of God. Then let us not
look to this, that we are not punished; but let us consider whether we have not
sinned: if sinning we are not punished, we have the more reason to tremble. Say,
if you have a slave, and you only threaten him, and do not beat him; when is he
most in fear, when most inclined to run away? Is is not when you only threaten
him? And hence we advise each other not to be continually using threats, thereby
choosing rather to agitate the mind by the terror, and lacerating it worse than
with blows. For in the one instance the punishment is momentary, but in the
other it is perpetual. If then no one feels the stroke of the sickle, do not look to
this, but rather let each consider whether he commits such sins. Many like things
are done now as were done before the Flood, yet no flood has been sent: because
there is a hell threatened, and vengeance. Many sin as the people did in Sodom,
yet no rain of fire has been poured down; because a river of fire is prepared.
Many go the lengths of Pharaoh; yet they have not fared like Pharaoh, they have
not been drowned in a Red Sea: for the sea that awaits them, is the sea of the
bottomless pit, where the punishment is not accompanied with insensibility,
where there is no suffocation to end all, but in ever lengthened torture, in
burning, in strangling, they are consumed there. Many have offended like the
Israelites, but no serpents have devoured them: there awaits them the worm that

never dies. Many have been like Gehazi, yet they have not been struck with
leprosy: for instead of leprosy, it remains for them to be cut asunder, and
numbered among the hypocrites. Many have both sworn and forsworn; but if
they have indeed escaped, let us not be confident: the gnashing of teeth awaits
them. Yea, here too they will suffer many grievous woes, though, it may be, not
immediately, but after further transgressions, that the vengeance may be the
greater; for even we often set out at first with small sins, and then through great
offenses lose all. Therefore when you see anything happening to you, call to
mind that particular sin of yours. The sons of Jacob are an example of this.
Remember Joseph's brothers; they had sold their brother, they had even
attempted to slay him; nay, they had slain him, as far as inclination went; they
had deceived and grieved the old man; they suffered nothing. After many years
they are brought into extreme peril, and now they are put in remembrance of this
their sin. Exceeding wisely is this circumstance brought in. Hear what they say:
"We are verily guilty concerning our brother." [Genesis 42:21] In this manner
then do thou also, when anything happens, say, We are verily guilty, because we
have not obeyed Christ; because we have sworn; my much swearing, and my
false swearing, has fallen upon my own head. Confess thou; since they also
confessed, and were saved. For what though the punishment follow not
immediately? Since Ahab also did not immediately after his sin in the matter of
Naboth suffer that vengeance which he yet at last suffered. [1 Kings 21:19] And
what is the reason of this? God sets you a time, in which to wash yourself clean;
but if you persist, at last He will send down the vengeance. You have seen the
fate of liars. Consider what is the fate of false swearers, consider, and desist. It is
impossible a swearer should not forswear himself, whether he will or not; and no
perjurer can be saved. One false oath suffices to finish all, to draw down upon us
the whole measure of vengeance. Let us then take heed to ourselves, that we may
escape the punishment due to this offense, and be deemed worthy of the loving
kindness of God, through the grace and mercies of His only-begotten Son, with
Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, now and