came of Peter's discourse, by his admirably skilful way of relating the facts?
They glorified God that He had given repentance to themselves ([καὶ αὐτοῖς])
also: they were humbled by these words. Hence was the door of faith opened
thenceforth to the Gentiles. But, if you please, let us look over again what has
been said.
"While Peter yet spoke," etc. (Recapitulation.) He does not say that Peter
was astonished, but, "They of the circumcision:" since he knew what was in
preparation. And yet they ought to have marvelled at this, how they themselves
had believed. When they heard that they had believed, they were not astonished,
but when God gave them the Spirit. Then "answered Peter and said," etc. [Acts
10:47] And therefore it is that he says, "God has shown that I should not call
common or unclean any human being." [Acts 10:28] He knew this from the first,
and plans his discourse beforehand (with a view to it). Gentiles? What Gentiles
henceforth? They were no longer Gentiles, the Truth having come. It is nothing
wonderful, he says, if before the act of baptism they received the Spirit: in our
own case this same happened. Peter shows that not as the rest either were they
baptized, but in a much better way. This is the reason why the thing takes place
in this manner, that they may have nothing to say, but even in this way may
account them equal with themselves. "And they besought him," it says, "to tarry
certain days." [Acts 10:48] "And the Apostles and brethren, etc. And they of the
circumcision contended with him." [ch. 11:1, 2] Do you remark how they were
not kindly disposed towards him? Saying "You went in to men uncircumcised,
and ate with them." [Acts 11:3] Do you note what zeal they had for the Law?
Not Peter's authority abashed them, not the signs which had taken place, not the
success achieved, what a thing it was, the Gentiles having "received the word:"
but they contended about those petty things. For if none of those (signs) had
taken place, was not the success (itself) enough? But not so does Peter frame his
defence: for he was wise, or rather it was not his wisdom, but the Spirit that
spoke the words. And by the matter of his defence, he shows that in no one point
was he the author, but in every point God, and upon Him he casts the whole.

"The trance," he says— it was He that caused me to fall into it, for "I was in
Joppa," etc.: the vessel— it was He that showed it; I objected: again, He spoke,
and even then I did not hear: the Spirit commanded me to go, and even then
though I went, I did not run: I told that God had sent me, and after these things,
even then I did not baptize, but again God did the whole. God baptized them, not
I. And he does not say, Was it not right then to add the water? But, implying that
nothing was lacking, "What was I, that I should withstand God?" What a
defence is here! For he does not say, Then knowing these things, hold your
peace; but what? He stands their attack, and to their impeachment he pleads—
"What was I, to be able to hinder God?" It was not possible for me to hinder— a
forcible plea indeed, and such as might well put them to shame. Whence being at
last afraid, "they held their peace and glorified God."
In like manner ought we also to glorify God for the good things which
befall our neighbors, only not in the way that the rest of the newly-baptized are
insulted, when they see others receiving baptism, and immediately departing this
life. It, is right to glorify God, even though all be saved: and as for you, if you be
willing, you have received a greater gift (than they): I do not mean in respect of
the baptism, for the gift there is the same for him as for you, but in regard that
you have received a set time for winning distinction. The other put on the robe,
and was not suffered to exhibit himself therewith in the procession, whereas to
you, God has given full opportunity to use your arms for the right purpose,
thereby to make proof of them. The other goes his way, having only the reward
of his faith: you stand in the course, both able to obtain an abundant recompense
for your works, and to show yourself as much more glorious than he, as the sun
is than the smallest star, as the general, nay rather as the Emperor himself, than
the lowest soldier. Then blame yourself, or rather not blame, but correct: for it is
not enough to blame yourself; it is in your power to contend afresh. Have you
been thrown? Have you taken grievous hurt? Stand up, recover yourself: you are
still in the course, the meeting ([θέατρον]) is not yet broken up. Do you not see
how many that have been thrown in the wrestling have afterwards resumed the