place then from the shame of it, he comes to the thing in question. Now what is
this thing? "For the end of those things is death." Since then shame seems to be
no such serious evil, he comes to what is very fearful, I mean death; though in
good truth what he had before mentioned were enough. For consider how
exceeding great the mischief must be, inasmuch as, even when freed from the
vengeance due to it, they could not get free of the shame. What wages then, he
says, do you expect from the reality, when from the bare recollection, and that
too when you are freed from the vengeance, you hide your face and blush,
though under such grace as you are! But God's side is far otherwise.
Ver. 22. "For now being made free from sin, and become servants to God,
you have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life."
Of the former, the fruit was shame, even after the being set free. Of these
the fruit is holiness, and where holiness is, there is all confidence. But of those
things the end is death, and of these everlasting life. Do you see how he points
out some things as already given, and some as existing in hope, and from what
are given he draws proof of the others also, that is from the holiness of the life.
For to prevent your saying (i.e. as an objection) everything lies in hope, he
points out that you have already reaped fruits, first the being freed from
wickedness, and such evils as the very recollection of puts one to shame; second,
the being made a servant unto righteousness; a third, the enjoying of holiness; a
fourth, the obtaining of life, and life too not for a season, but everlasting. Yet
with all these, he says, do but serve as you served it. For though the master is far
preferable, and the service also has many advantages, and the rewards too for
which you are serving, still I make no further demand. Next, since he had
mentioned arms and a king, he keeps on with the metaphor in these words:
Ver. 23. "For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord."
After speaking of the wages of sin, in the case of the blessings, he has not
kept to the same order ([τάξιν], rank or relation): for he does not say, the wages
of good deeds, "but the gift of God;" to show, that it was not of themselves that

they were freed, nor was it a due they received, neither yet a return, nor a
recompense of labors, but by grace all these things came about. And so there was
a superiority for this cause also, in that He did not free them only, or change their
condition for a better, but that He did it without any labor or trouble upon their
part: and that He not only freed them, but also gave them much more than
before, and that through His Son. And the whole of this he has interposed as
having discussed the subject of grace, and being on the point of overthrowing the
Law next. That these things then might not both make them rather listless, he
inserted the part about strictness of life, using every opportunity of rousing the
hearer to the practice of virtue. For when he calls death the wages of sin, he
alarms them again, and secures them against dangers to come. For the words he
uses to remind them of their former estate, he also employs so as to make them
thankful, and more secure against any inroads of temptations. Here then he
brings the hortatory part to a stop, and proceeds with the doctrines again,
speaking on this wise.
Chap. vii. ver. 1. "Do you not know, brethren, for I speak to them that know
the Law."
Since then he had said, we are "dead to sin," he here shows that not sin
only, but also the Law, has no dominion over them. But if the Law has none,
much less has sin: and to render his language palatable, he uses a human
example to make this plain by. And he seems to be stating one point, but he sets
down at once two arguments for his proposition. One, that when a husband is
dead, the woman is no longer subject to her husband, and there is nothing to
prevent her becoming the wife of another man: and the other, that in the present
case it is not the husband only that is dead but the wife also. So that one may
enjoy liberty in two ways. Now if when the husband is dead, she is freed from
his power, when the woman is shown to be dead also, she is much more at
liberty. For if the one event frees her from his power, much more does the
concurrence of both. As he is about to proceed then to a proof of these points, he
starts with an encomium of the hearers, in these words, "Do you not know,