THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ's cross should be worshipped

with the adoration of "latria"?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's cross should not be
worshiped with the adoration of "latria." For no dutiful son honors
that which dishonors his father, as the scourge with which he was
scourged, or the gibbet on which he was hanged; rather does he
abhor it. Now Christ underwent the most shameful death on the
cross; according to Wis. 2:20: "Let us condemn Him to a most
shameful death." Therefore we should not venerate the cross but
rather we should abhor it.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's humanity is worshiped with the
adoration of "latria," inasmuch as it is united to the Son of God in
Person. But this cannot be said of the cross. Therefore Christ's
cross should not be worshiped with the adoration of "latria."
Objection 3: Further, as Christ's cross was the instrument of His
passion and death, so were also many other things, for instance, the
nails, the crown, the lance; yet to these we do not show the worship
of "latria." It seems, therefore, that Christ's cross should not be
worshiped with the adoration of "latria."
On the contrary, We show the worship of "latria" to that in which we
place our hope of salvation. But we place our hope in Christ's cross,
for the Church sings:
"Dear
Cross,
best
hope
o'er all
beside,
That
cheers
the
solemn
passiontide:
Give to
the just

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.5.

increase
of
grace,
Give to
each
contrite
sinner
peace."

Hymn
Vexilla
Regis

Therefore Christ's cross should be worshiped with the adoration of
"latria."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), honor or reverence is due
to a rational creature only; while to an insensible creature, no honor
or reverence is due save by reason of a rational nature. And this in
two ways. First, inasmuch as it represents a rational nature:
secondly, inasmuch as it is united to it in any way whatsoever. In the
first way men are wont to venerate the king's image; in the second
way, his robe. And both are venerated by men with the same
veneration as they show to the king.
If, therefore, we speak of the cross itself on which Christ was
crucified, it is to be venerated by us in both ways---namely, in one
way in so far as it represents to us the figure of Christ extended
thereon; in the other way, from its contact with the limbs of Christ,
and from its being saturated with His blood. Wherefore in each way it
is worshiped with the same adoration as Christ, viz. the adoration of
"latria." And for this reason also we speak to the cross and pray to it,
as to the Crucified Himself. But if we speak of the effigy of Christ's
cross in any other material whatever---for instance, in stone or wood,
silver or gold---thus we venerate the cross merely as Christ's image,
which we worship with the adoration of "latria," as stated above
(Article 3).
Reply to Objection 1: If in Christ's cross we consider the point of
view and intention of those who did not believe in Him, it will appear