There is, no doubt, a certain humiliation in begging, as having a thing done to you is
less honourable than doing it, and receiving than giving, and obeying royal power than
governing and reigning. The spontaneous embracing of humiliations is a practice of
humility, not in any and every case, but when it is done for a needful purpose: for
humility, being a virtue, does nothing indiscreetly. It is then not humility but folly to
embrace any and every humiliation: but where virtue calls for a thing to be done, it
belongs to humility not to shrink from doing it for the humiliation that goes with it, for
instance, not to refuse some mean service where charity calls upon you so to help your
neighbour. Thus then where begging is requisite for the perfection of a life of poverty, it
is a point of humility to bear this humiliation. Sometimes too, even where our own duty
does not require us to embrace humiliations, it is an act of virtue to take them up in
order to encourage others by our example more easily to bear what is incumbent on
them: for a general sometimes will do the office of a common soldier to encourage the
rest. Sometimes again we may make a virtuous use of humiliations as a medicine. Thus
if any one's mind is prone to undue self-exaltation, he may with advantage make a
moderate use of humiliations, either self-imposed or imposed by others, so to check the
elation of his spirit by putting himself on a level with the lowest class of the community in
the doing of mean offices.
Fifth mode. There have also been some who said that the votaries of a perfect life
should take no thought either for begging or labouring or laying up anything for
themselves, but should exped their sustenance from God alone, according to the texts,
Be not solicitous, and, Take no thought for the morrow (Matt. vi, 25, 34).
Criticism. This seems quite an irrational proceeding. For it is foolish to wish an end and
omit the means ordained to that end. Now to the end of eating there is ordained some
human care of providing oneself with food. They then who cannot live without eating
ought to have some solicitude about seeking their food. There follows also a strange
absurdity: for by parity of reasoning one might say that he will not walk, or open his
mouth to eat, or avoid a stone falling, or a sword striking him, but expect God to do all,
which is tantamount to tempting God.
Reply. It is quite an irrational error to suppose that all solicitude about making a
livelihood is forbidden by the Lord. Every action requires care: if then a man ought to
have no solicitude about temporal things, it follows that he should do nothing temporal,
which is neither a possible nor a reasonable course. For God has prescribed to every
being actions according to the peculiarity of its nature. Man, being made up of a nature
at once spiritual and corporeal, must by divine ordinance exercise bodily actions; and at
the same time have spiritual aims; and he is the more perfect, the more spiritual his
aims are. But it is not a mode of perfection proper to man to omit bodily action: bodily
actions serve necessary purposes in the preservation of life; and whoever omits them
neglects his life, which he is bound to preserve. To look for aid from God in matters in
which one can help oneself by one's own action, and so to leave that action out, is a
piece of folly and a tempting of God: for it is proper to the divine goodness to provide for
things, not immediately by doing everything itself, but by moving other things to their
own proper action (Chap.LXXVII). We must not then omit the means of helping