2 Corinthians 2:11
"That no advantage may be gained over us by Satan: for we are not
ignorant of his devices."
Do you see how he both commits the power to them and again takes away
that by that he may soften them, by this eradicate their self will. But this is not
all that he provides for by this, but shows also that should they be disobedient
the harm would reach to all, just as he did at the outset also. For then too he said,
"A little leaven leavens the whole lump." [1 Corinthians 5:6] And here again,
"Lest Satan should get an advantage of us." And throughout, he makes this
forgiveness the joint act of himself and them. Consider it from the first. "But if
any," says he, "have caused sorrow he has caused sorrow not to me, but in part
(that I press not too heavily) to you all." Then again, "Sufficient to such a one is
this punishment which was" inflicted by the "many." This is his own decision
and opinion. He rested not however with this decision, but again makes them
partners saying, "So that contrariwise ye should rather forgive" him "and
comfort" him. "Wherefore I beseech you to confirm your love towards him."
Having thus again made the whole their act, he passes to his own authority,
saying, "For to this end did I write unto you, that I might know the proof of you,
whether you are obedient in all things." Then, again, he makes the favor theirs,
saying, "To whom you forgive anything." Then, his own, "I" forgive "also:"
saying, "if I have forgiven anything, it is for your sakes." Then both theirs and
his, "For," says he, "if I have forgiven any thing, for your sakes forgave I it in the
person of Christ," either [that is] for the glory of Christ, or as though Christ
commanding this also, which was most effectual to prevail with them. For after
this they would have feared not to grant that which tended to His glory and
which He willed. Then again he signifies the common harm should they disobey,
when he says, "Lest Satan should get an advantage of us;" well naming it,

getting advantage. For he no more takes his own, but violently seizes ours, for he
is reformed. And tell me not that this one only becomes the wild beast's prey, but
consider this also, that the number of the herd is diminished, and now especially
when it might recover what it had lost. "For we are not ignorant of his devices,"
That he destroys even under the show of piety. For not only by leading into
fornication can he destroy, but even by the contrary, the unmeasured sorrow
following on the repentance for it. When then besides his own he takes ours too,
when both by bidding to sin, he destroys; and when we bid repent, violently
seizes; how is not this case getting "advantage ?" For he is not content with
striking down by sin, but even by repentance he does this except we be vigilant.
Wherefore also with reason did he call it getting advantage, when he even
conquers our own weapons. For to take by sin is his proper work; by repentance,
however, is no more his; for ours, not his, is that weapon. When then even by
this he is able to take, think how disgraceful the defeat, how he will laugh at and
run us down as weak and pitiful, if he is to subdue us with our own weapons. For
it were matter for exceeding scorn and of the last disgrace, that he should inflict
wounds on us through our own remedies. Therefore he said, "for we are not
ignorant of his devices," exposing his versatility, his craftiness, his evil devices,
his malice, his capacity to injure under a show of piety.
6. These things then having in mind, let us too never despise any one; nor
ever, though we fall into sin, despair; on the other hand, again, let us not be easyminded afterwards, but, when we transgress, afflict our minds and not merely
give vent to words. For I know many who say indeed that they bewail their sins,
but do nothing of account. They fast and wear rough garments; but after money
are more eager than hucksters, are more the prey of anger than wild beasts, and
take more pleasure in detraction than others do in commendations. These things
are not repentance, these things are the semblance and shadow only of
repentance, not repentance itself. Wherefore in the case of these persons too it is
well to say, Take heed "lest Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not
ignorant of his devices;" for some he destroys through sins, others through