of those, though they interceded for the persons who conspired against them,
nevertheless it was for those with whose guidance they had been entrusted: and
the same thing happened as if one should stand up for a wild and lawless son,
but still a son: whereas Paul wished to be accursed in the stead of those with
whose guardianship he was not entrusted. For to the Gentiles was he sent. Do
you perceive the greatness of his soul and the loftiness of his spirit, transcending
the very heaven? This man do thou emulate: but if you can not, at least follow
those who shone in the old covenant. For thus shall you find your own profit, if
you seek that of your neighbor. Wherefore when you feel backward to care for
your brother, considering that no otherwise can you be saved, at least for your
own sake stand thou up for him and his interests.
5. And although what has been said is sufficient to convince you that no
otherwise is it possible to secure our own benefit: yet if you would also assure
yourself of it by the examples of common life, conceive a fire happening any
where to be kindled in a house, and then some of the neighbors with a view to
their own interest refusing to confront the danger but shutting themselves up and
remaining at home, in fear lest some one find his way in and purloin some part
of the household goods; how great punishment will they endure? Since the fire
will come on and burn down likewise all that is theirs; and because they looked
not to the profit of their neighbor, they lose even their own besides. For so God,
willing to bind us all to each other, has imposed upon things such a necessity,
that in the profit of one neighbor that of the other is bound up; and the whole
world is thus constituted. And therefore in a vessel too, if a storm come on, and
the steersman, leaving the profit of the many, should seek his own only, he will
quickly sink both himself and them. And of each several art too we may say that
should it look to its own profit only, life could never stand, nor even the art itself
which so seeks its own. Therefore the husbandman sows not so much grain only
as is sufficient for himself, since he would long ago have famished both himself
and others; but seeks the profit of the many: and the soldier takes the field
against dangers, not that he may save himself, but that he may also place his

cities in security: and the merchant brings not home so much as may be
sufficient for himself alone, but for many others also.
Now if any say, "each man does this, not looking to my interest, but his
own, for he engages in all these things to obtain for himself money and glory and
security, so that in seeking my profit he seeks his own:" this also do I say and
long since wished to hear from you, and for this have I framed all my discourse;
viz. to signify that your neighbor then seeks his own profit, when he looks to
yours. For since men would no otherwise make up their mind to seek the things
of their neighbor, except they were reduced to this necessity; therefore God has
thus joined things together, and suffers them not to arrive at their own profit
except they first travel through the profit of others.
Well then, this is natural to man, thus to follow after his neighbors'
advantage; but one ought to be persuaded not from this reason, but from what
pleases God. For it is not possible to be saved, wanting this; but though you
should exercise the highest perfection of the work and neglect others who are
perishing, you will gain no confidence towards God. Whence is this evident?
From what the blessed Paul declared. "For if I bestow my goods to feed the poor,
and give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing," [1
Corinthians 13:3] says he. Sees thou how much Paul requires of us? And yet he
that bestowed his goods to feed the poor, sought not his own good, but that of his
neighbor. But this alone is not enough, he says. For he would have it done with
sincerity and much sympathy. For therefore also God made it a law that he might
bring us into the bond of love. When therefore He demands so large a measure,
and we do not render even that which is less, of what indulgence shall we be
worthy?
"And how," says one, "did God say to Lot by the Angels, 'Escape for your
life?'" [Genesis 19:17] Say, when, and why. When the punishment was brought
near, not when there was an opportunity of correction but when they were
condemned and incurably diseased, and old and young had rushed into the same
passions, and henceforth they must needs be burned up, and in that day when the