whence came this intensity of lust? It was from the desertion of God: and
whence is the desertion of God? From the lawlessness of them that left Him;
"men with men working that which is unseemly." Do not, he means, because you
have heard that they burned, suppose that the evil was only in desire. For the
greater part of it came of their luxuriousness, which also kindled into flame their
lust. And this is why he did not say being swept along or being overtaken, an
expression he uses elsewhere; but what? Working. They made a business of the
sin, and not only a business, but even one zealously followed up. And he called
it not lust, but that which is unseemly, and that properly. For they both
dishonored nature, and trampled on the laws. And see the great confusion which
fell out on both sides. For not only was the head turned downwards but the feet
too were upwards, and they became enemies to themselves and to one another,
bringing in a pernicious kind of strife, and one even more lawless than any civil
war, and one rife in divisions, and of varied form. For they divided this into four
new, and lawless kinds. Since (3 manuscripts whence) this war was not twofold
or threefold, but even fourfold. Consider then. It was meet, that the two should
be one, I mean the woman and the man. For "the two," it says, "shall be one
flesh." [Genesis 2:24] But this the desire of intercourse effected, and united the
sexes to one another. This desire the devil having taken away, and having turned
the course thereof into another fashion, he thus sundered the sexes from one
another, and made the one to become two parts in opposition to the law of God.
For it says, "the two shall be one flesh;" but he divided the one flesh into two:
here then is one war. Again, these same two parts he provoked to war both
against themselves and against one another. For even women again abused
women, and not men only. And the men stood against one another, and against
the female sex, as happens in a battle by night. You see a second and third war,
and a fourth and fifth; there is also another, for beside what have been mentioned
they also behaved lawlessly against nature itself. For when the Devil saw that
this desire it is, principally, which draws the sexes together, he was bent on
cutting through the tie, so as to destroy the race, not only by their not copulating

lawfully, but also by their being stirred up to war, and in sedition against one
another.
"And receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was
meet." See how he goes again to the fountain head of the evil, namely, the
impiety that comes of their doctrines, and this he says is a reward of that
lawlessness. For since in speaking of hell and punishment, it seemed he would
not at present be credible to the ungodly and deliberate choosers of such a life,
but even scorned, he shows that the punishment was in this pleasure itself. (So
Plato Theæt. p. 176, 7.) But if they perceive it not, but are still pleased, be not
amazed. For even they that are mad, and are afflicted with phrenzy (cf. Soph. Aj.
265-277) while doing themselves much injury and making themselves such
objects of compassion, that others weep over them themselves smile and revel
over what has happened. Yet we do not only for this not say that they are quit of
punishment, but for this very reason are under a more grievous vengeance, in
that they are unconscious of the plight they are in. For it is not the disordered but
those who are sound whose votes one has to gain. Yet of old the matter seemed
even to be a law, and a certain law-giver among them bade the domestic slaves
neither to use ointments when dry (i.e. except in bathing) nor to keep youths,
giving the free this place of honor, or rather of shamefulness. Yet they, however,
did not think the thing shameful, but as being a grand privilege, and one too
great for slaves, the Athenian people, the wisest of people, and Solon who is so
great among them, permitted it to the free alone. And sundry other books of the
philosophers may one see full of this disease. But we do not therefore say that
the thing was made lawful, but that they who received this law were pitiable, and
objects for many tears. For these are treated in the same way as women that play
the whore. Or rather their plight is more miserable. For in the case of the one the
intercourse, even if lawless, is yet according to nature: but this is contrary both
to law and nature. For even if there were no hell, and no punishment had been
threatened, this were worse than any punishment. Yet if you say "they found
pleasure in it," you tell me what adds to the vengeance. For suppose I were to