now that we have lost that honor, and have come to have need of these, to fail
again in duly employing even this second remedy. For if it be a blame to stand in
need of written words, and not to have brought down on ourselves the grace of
the Spirit; consider how heavy the charge of not choosing to profit even after this
assistance, but rather treating what is written with neglect, as if it were cast forth
without purpose, and at random, and so bringing down upon ourselves our
punishment with increase.
But that no such effect may ensue, let us give strict heed unto the things that
are written; and let us learn how the Old Law was given on the one hand, how on
the other the New Covenant.
3. How then was that law given in time past, and when, and where? After
the destruction of the Egyptians, in the wilderness, on Mount Sinai, when smoke
and fire were rising up out of the mountain, a trumpet sounding, thunders and
lightnings, and Moses entering into the very depth of the cloud. But in the new
covenant not so—neither in a wilderness, nor in a mountain, nor with smoke and
darkness and cloud and tempest; but at the beginning of the day, in a house,
while all were sitting together, with great quietness, all took place. For to those,
being more unreasonable, and hard to guide, there was need of outward pomp, as
of a wilderness, a mountain, a smoke, a sound of trumpet, and the other like
things: but they who were of a higher character, and submissive, and who had
risen above mere corporeal imaginations, Yea, for it was removal of punishment,
and remission of sins, and "righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption,"
and adoption, and an inheritance of Heaven, and a relationship unto the Son of
God, which he came declaring unto all; to enemies, to the perverse, to them that
were sitting in darkness. What then could ever be equal to these good tidings?
God on earth, man in Heaven; and all became mingled together, angels joined
the choirs of men, men had fellowship with the angels, and with the other
powers above: and one might see the long war brought to an end, and
reconciliation made between God and our nature, the devil brought to shame,
demons in flight, death destroyed, Paradise opened, the curse blotted out, sin put

out of the way, error driven off, truth returning, the word of godliness
everywhere sown, and flourishing in its growth, the polity of those above planted
on the earth, those powers in secure intercourse with us, and on earth angels
continually haunting, and hope abundant touching things to come.
Therefore he has called the history good tidings, forasmuch as all other
things surely are words only without substance; as, for instance, plenty of
wealth, greatness of power, kingdoms, and glories, and honors, and whatever
other things among men are accounted to be good: but those which are published
by the fishermen would be legitimately and properly called good tidings: not
only as being sure and immoveable blessings, and beyond our deserts, but also
as being given to us with all facility.
For not by laboring and sweating, not by fatigue and suffering, but merely
as being beloved of God, we received what we have received.
5. And why can it have been, that when there were so many disciples, two
write only from among the apostles, and two from among their followers? (For
one that was a disciple of Paul, and another of Peter, together with Matthew and
John, wrote the Gospels.) It was because they did nothing for vainglory, but all
things for use.
"What then? Was not one evangelist sufficient to tell all?" One indeed was
sufficient; but if there be four that write, not at the same times, nor in the same
places, neither after having met together, and conversed one with another, and
then they speak all things as it were out of one mouth, this becomes a very great
demonstration of the truth.
6. "But the contrary," it may be said, "has come to pass, for in many places
they are convicted of discordance." Nay, this very thing is a very great evidence
of their truth. For if they had agreed in all things exactly even to time, and place,
and to the very words, none of our enemies would have believed but that they
had met together, and had written what they wrote by some human compact;
because such entire agreement as this comes not of simplicity. But now even that
discordance which seems to exist in little matters delivers them from all