SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.4.

absolutely, for two reasons. First, because though an act of virtue
come under a precept, one may nevertheless perform that act of
virtue without considering the aspect of precept. Consequently, if
there be any virtue, whose object is naturally prior to the precept,
that virtue is said to be naturally prior to obedience. Such a virtue is
faith, whereby we come to know the sublime nature of divine
authority, by reason of which the power to command is competent to
God. Secondly, because infusion of grace and virtues may precede,
even in point of time, all virtuous acts: and in this way obedience is
not prior to all virtues, neither in point of time nor by nature.
Reply to Objection 3: There are two kinds of good. There is that to
which we are bound of necessity, for instance to love God, and so
forth: and by no means may such a good be set aside on account of
obedience. But there is another good to which man is not bound of
necessity, and this good we ought sometimes to set aside for the
sake of obedience to which we are bound of necessity, since we
ought not to do good by falling into sin. Yet as Gregory remarks
(Moral. xxxv), "he who forbids his subjects any single good, must
needs allow them many others, lest the souls of those who obey
perish utterly from starvation, through being deprived of every
good." Thus the loss of one good may be compensated by
obedience and other goods.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether God ought to be obeyed in all things?

Objection 1: It seems that God need not be obeyed in all things. For
it is written (Mt. 9:30,31) that our Lord after healing the two blind men
commanded them, saying: "See that no man know this. But they
going out spread His fame abroad in all that country." Yet they are
not blamed for so doing. Therefore it seems that we are not bound to
obey God in all things.
Objection 2: Further, no one is bound to do anything contrary to
virtue. Now we find that God commanded certain things contrary to
virtue: thus He commanded Abraham to slay his innocent son (Gn.
22); and the Jews to steal the property of the Egyptians (Ex. 11),
which things are contrary to justice; and Osee to take to himself a
woman who was an adulteress (Osee 3), and this is contrary to
chastity. Therefore God is not to be obeyed in all things.
Objection 3: Further, whoever obeys God conforms his will to the
divine will even as to the thing willed. But we are not bound in all
things to conform our will to the divine will as to the thing willed, as
stated above (FS, Question 19, Article 10). Therefore man is not
bound to obey God in all things.
On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 24:7): "All things that the Lord hath
spoken we will do, and we will be obedient."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), he who obeys is moved by
the command of the person he obeys, just as natural things are
moved by their motive causes. Now just a God is the first mover of
all things that are moved naturally, so too is He the first mover of all
wills, as shown above (FS, Question 9, Article 6). Therefore just as all
natural things are subject to the divine motion by a natural necessity
so too all wills, by a kind of necessity of justice, are bound to obey
the divine command.
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord in telling the blind men to conceal the
miracle had no intention of binding them with the force of a divine
precept, but, as Gregory says (Moral. xix), "gave an example to His
servants who follow Him that they might wish to hide their virtue and
yet that it should be proclaimed against their will, in order that others
might profit by their example."