bear to things which they actually are not.
Reply to Objection 3: Things are said to be false, not as compared
with the divine intellect, in which case they would be false simply,
but as compared with our intellect; and thus they are false only
relatively.
To the argument which is urged on the contrary, likeness or
defective representation does not involve the idea of falsity except in
so far as it gives occasion to false opinion. Hence a thing is not
always said to be false, because it resembles another thing; but only
when the resemblance is such as naturally to produce a false
opinion, not in any one case, but in the majority of instances.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there is falsity in the senses?

Objection 1: It seems that falsity is not in the senses. For Augustine
says (De Vera Relig. 33): "If all the bodily senses report as they are
affected, I do not know what more we can require from them." Thus it
seems that we are not deceived by the senses; and therefore that
falsity is not in them.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Metaph. iv, 24) that
falsity is not proper to the senses, but to the imagination.
Objection 3: Further, in non-complex things there is neither true nor
false, but in complex things only. But affirmation and negation do
not belong to the senses. Therefore in the senses there is no falsity.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Soliloq. ii, 6), "It appears that the
senses entrap us into error by their deceptive similitudes."
I answer that, Falsity is not to be sought in the senses except as
truth is in them. Now truth is not in them in such a way as that the
senses know truth, but in so far as they apprehend sensible things
truly, as said above (Question 16, Article 2), and this takes place
through the senses apprehending things as they are, and hence it
happens that falsity exists in the senses through their apprehending
or judging things to be otherwise than they really are.
The knowledge of things by the senses is in proportion to the
existence of their likeness in the senses; and the likeness of a thing
can exist in the senses in three ways. In the first way, primarily and
of its own nature, as in sight there is the likeness of colors, and of
other sensible objects proper to it. Secondly, of its own nature,
though not primarily; as in sight there is the likeness of shape, size,
and of other sensible objects common to more than one sense.
Thirdly, neither primarily nor of its own nature, but accidentally, as in
sight, there is the likeness of a man, not as man, but in so far as it is
accidental to the colored object to be a man.
Sense, then, has no false knowledge about its proper objects, except
accidentally and rarely, and then, because of the unsound organ it
does not receive the sensible form rightly; just as other passive
subjects because of their indisposition receive defectively the