Therefore unbelief does not prevent the existence of marriage
between unbelievers.
I answer that, Marriage was instituted chiefly for the good of the
offspring, not only as to its begetting---since this can be effected
even without marriage---but also as to its advancement to a perfect
state, because everything intends naturally to bring its effect to
perfection. Now a twofold perfection is to be considered in the
offspring. one is the perfection of nature, not only as regards the
body but also as regards the soul, by those means which are of the
natural law. The other is the perfection of grace: and the former
perfection is material and imperfect in relation to the latter.
Consequently, since those things which are for the sake of the end
are proportionate to the end, the marriage that tends to the first
perfection is imperfect and material in comparison with that which
tends to the second perfection. And since the first perfection can be
common to unbelievers and believers, while the second belongs
only to believers, it follows that between unbelievers there is
marriage indeed, but not perfected by its ultimate perfection as there
is between believers.
Reply to Objection 1: Marriage was instituted not only as a
sacrament, but also as an office of nature. And therefore, although
marriage is not competent to unbelievers, as a sacrament dependent
on the dispensation of the Church's ministers, it is nevertheless
competent to them as fulfilling an office of nature. And yet even a
marriage of this kind is a sacrament after the manner of a habit,
although it is not actually since they do not marry actually in the
faith of the Church.
Reply to Objection 2: Disparity of worship is an impediment to
marriage, not by reason of unbelief, but on account of the difference
of faith. For disparity of worship hinders not only the second
perfection of the offspring, but also the first, since the parents
endeavor to draw their children in different directions, which is not
the case when both are unbelievers.
Reply to Objection 3: As already stated (ad 1) there is marriage
between unbelievers, in so far as marriage fulfills an office of nature.
Now those things that pertain to the natural law are determinable by
positive law: and therefore if any law among unbelievers forbid the
contracting of marriage with unbelievers of a different rite, the
disparity of worship will be an impediment to their intermarrying.

They are not, however, forbidden by Divine law, because before God,
however much one may stray from the faith, this makes no
difference to one's being removed from grace: nor is it forbidden by
any law of the Church who has not to judge of those who are
without.
Reply to Objection 4: The chastity and other virtues of unbelievers
are said not to be real, because they cannot attain the end of real
virtue, which is real happiness. Thus we say it is not a real wine if it
has not the effect of wine.
Reply to Objection 5: An unbeliever does not sin in having
intercourse with his wife, if he pays her the marriage debt, for the
good of the offspring, or for the troth whereby he is bound to her:
since this is an act of justice and of temperance which observes the
due circumstance in pleasure of touch; even as neither does he sin
in performing acts of other civic virtues. Again, the reason why the
whole life of unbelievers is said to be a sin is not that they sin in
every act, but because they cannot be delivered from the bondage of
sin by that which they do.