But do ye, being aware of his design, direct your wrath against him: and
having set the charioteer upon the car, bend the eye of your minds towards God.
For in all other instances he that appoints the games contributes nothing, but
only awaits the end. But in this case, He is all in all, who appointed the contest,
even God. Him therefore let us render propitious, and surely we shall obtain the
blessings in store; through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to Whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor,
now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

## Homily 18 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 6:15-16
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take
away the members of Christ, and make them members of a harlot? God forbid.
Having passed on from the fornicator to the covetous person, he comes
back to the former from the latter, no longer henceforth discoursing with him but
with the others who had not committed fornication. And in the act of securing
them lest they fall into the same sins, he assails him again. For he that has
committed sin, though you direct your words to another, is stung even in that
way; his conscience being thoroughly awakened and scourging him.
Now the fear of punishment indeed was enough to keep them in chastity.
But seeing that he does not wish by fear alone to set these matters right, he uses
both threatenings and reasons.
Now upon that other occasion, having stated the sin, and prescribed the
punishment, and pointed out the harm which intercourse with the fornicator
brought upon all, he left off, and passed to the subject of covetousness: and
having threatened the covetous and all the rest whom he mentioned with
expulsion from the kingdom, he so concluded his discourse. But here he takes in
hand the work of admonition in a yet more terrific manner. For as he that only
punishes a sin and does nothing to point out its most extreme lawlessness,
produces no such great effect by his chastisement: so again, he who only abashes
and fails to terrify by his mode of punishing, does not very keenly hit men of
hardened minds. Wherefore Paul does both: here he abashes, saying, "Do you
not know that we shall judge angels?" there again he terrifies, saying, "Do you
not know that the covetous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?"
And in regard to the fornicator, he again uses this order of discourse. For

having terrified him by what he had said before; first cutting him off and
delivering him to Satan, and then reminding him of that day which is coming; he
abashes him again by saying, "Do you not know that your bodies are members of
Christ?" thenceforth speaking as to children of noble birth. For whereas he had
said, "Now the body is for the Lord," he indicates it more plainly now. And in
another place as well he does this same thing, saying, [1 Corinthians 12:27]
"Now you are the body of Christ, and severally members thereof." And the same
figure he often employs, not with the same aim, but at one time to show His
love, and at another to increase their fear. But here he has employed it to startle
and fill them with alarm. "Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them members of a harlot? God forbid." Nothing can be apter to strike horror
than this expression. He said not, "Shall I take the members of Christ, and join
them on to a harlot?" but what? "make them members of a harlot;" which surely
would strike more keenly.
Then he makes out how the fornicator becomes this, saying thus, "Do you
not know that he that is joined unto a harlot is one body?" How is this evident?
"For the two, says He, shall become one."