scientific demonstration that a triangle has three angles equal to two
right angles, he comprehends that truth; whereas if anyone accepts
it as a probable opinion because wise men or most men teach it, he
cannot be said to comprehend the thing itself, because he does not
attain to that perfect mode of knowledge of which it is intrinsically
capable. But no created intellect can attain to that perfect mode of
the knowledge of the Divine intellect whereof it is intrinsically
capable. Which thus appears---Everything is knowable according to
its actuality. But God, whose being is infinite, as was shown above
(Question 7) is infinitely knowable. Now no created intellect can
know God infinitely. For the created intellect knows the Divine
essence more or less perfectly in proportion as it receives a greater
or lesser light of glory. Since therefore the created light of glory
received into any created intellect cannot be infinite, it is clearly
impossible for any created intellect to know God in an infinite
degree. Hence it is impossible that it should comprehend God.
Reply to Objection 1: "Comprehension" is twofold: in one sense it is
taken strictly and properly, according as something is included in
the one comprehending; and thus in no way is God comprehended
either by intellect, or in any other way; forasmuch as He is infinite
and cannot be included in any finite being; so that no finite being
can contain Him infinitely, in the degree of His own infinity. In this
sense we now take comprehension. But in another sense
"comprehension" is taken more largely as opposed to "nonattainment"; for he who attains to anyone is said to comprehend him
when he attains to him. And in this sense God is comprehended by
the blessed, according to the words, "I held him, and I will not let him
go" (Cant 3:4); in this sense also are to be understood the words
quoted from the Apostle concerning comprehension. And in this way
"comprehension" is one of the three prerogatives of the soul,
responding to hope, as vision responds to faith, and fruition
responds to charity. For even among ourselves not everything seen
is held or possessed, forasmuch as things either appear sometimes
afar off, or they are not in our power of attainment. Neither, again, do
we always enjoy what we possess; either because we find no
pleasure in them, or because such things are not the ultimate end of
our desire, so as to satisfy and quell it. But the blessed possess
these three things in God; because they see Him, and in seeing Him,
possess Him as present, having the power to see Him always; and
possessing Him, they enjoy Him as the ultimate fulfilment of desire.
Reply to Objection 2: God is called incomprehensible not because

anything of Him is not seen; but because He is not seen as perfectly
as He is capable of being seen; thus when any demonstrable
proposition is known by probable reason only, it does not follow that
any part of it is unknown, either the subject, or the predicate, or the
composition; but that it is not as perfectly known as it is capable of
being known. Hence Augustine, in his definition of comprehension,
says the whole is comprehended when it is seen in such a way that
nothing of it is hidden from the seer, or when its boundaries can be
completely viewed or traced; for the boundaries of a thing are said to
be completely surveyed when the end of the knowledge of it is
attained.
Reply to Objection 3: The word "wholly" denotes a mode of the
object; not that the whole object does not come under knowledge,
but that the mode of the object is not the mode of the one who
knows. Therefore he who sees God's essence, sees in Him that He
exists infinitely, and is infinitely knowable; nevertheless, this infinite
mode does not extend to enable the knower to know infinitely; thus,
for instance, a person can have a probable opinion that a proposition
is demonstrable, although he himself does not know it as
demonstrated.