the ultimate beatitude of the rational creature consists, is beyond the
nature of every created intellect. Consequently no rational creature
can have the movement of the will directed towards such beatitude,
except it be moved thereto by a supernatural agent. This is what we
call the help of grace. Therefore it must be said that an angel could
not of his own will be turned to such beatitude, except by the help of
grace.
Reply to Objection 1: The angel loves God naturally, so far as God is
the author of his natural being. But here we are speaking of turning
to God, so far as God bestows beatitude by the vision of His
essence.
Reply to Objection 2: A thing is "difficult" which is beyond a power;
and this happens in two ways. First of all, because it is beyond the
natural capacity of the power. Thus, if it can be attained by some
help, it is said to be "difficult"; but if it can in no way be attained,
then it is "impossible"; thus it is impossible for a man to fly. In
another way a thing may be beyond the power, not according to the
natural order of such power, but owing to some intervening
hindrance; as to mount upwards is not contrary to the natural order
of the motive power of the soul; because the soul, considered in
itself, can be moved in any direction; but is hindered from so doing
by the weight of the body; consequently it is difficult for a man to
mount upwards. To be turned to his ultimate beatitude is difficult for
man, both because it is beyond his nature, and because he has a
hindrance from the corruption of the body and infection of sin. But it
is difficult for an angel, only because it is supernatural.
Reply to Objection 3: Every movement of the will towards God can
be termed a conversion to God. And so there is a threefold turning to
God. The first is by the perfect love of God; this belongs to the
creature enjoying the possession of God; and for such conversion,
consummate grace is required. The next turning to God is that which
merits beatitude; and for this there is required habitual grace, which
is the principle of merit. The third conversion is that whereby a man
disposes himself so that he may have grace; for this no habitual
grace is required; but the operation of God, Who draws the soul
towards Himself, according to Lam 5:21: "Convert us, O Lord, to
Thee, and we shall be converted." Hence it is clear that there is no
need to go on to infinity.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the angels were created in grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angels were not created in grace.
For Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ii, 8) that the angelic nature was first
made without form, and was called "heaven": but afterwards it
received its form, and was then called "light." But such formation
comes from grace. Therefore they were not created in grace.
Objection 2: Further, grace turns the rational creature towards God.
If, therefore, the angel had been created in grace, no angel would
ever have turned away from God.
Objection 3: Further, grace comes midway between nature and glory.
But the angels were not beatified in their creation. Therefore it seems
that they were not created in grace; but that they were first created in
nature only, and then received grace, and that last of all they were
beatified.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xii, 9), "Who wrought
the good will of the angels? Who, save Him Who created them with
His will, that is, with the pure love wherewith they cling to Him; at the
same time building up their nature and bestowing grace on them?"
I answer that, Although there are conflicting opinions on this point,
some holding that the angels were created only in a natural state,
while others maintain that they were created in grace; yet it seems
more probable, and more in keeping with the sayings of holy men,
that they were created in sanctifying grace. For we see that all things
which, in the process of time, being created by the work of Divine
Providence, were produced by the operation of God, were created in
the first fashioning of things according to seedlike forms, as
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii, 3), such as trees, animals, and the
rest. Now it is evident that sanctifying grace bears the same relation
to beatitude as the seedlike form in nature does to the natural effect;
hence (1 Jn. 3:9) grace is called the "seed" of God. As, then, in
Augustine's opinion it is contended that the seedlike forms of all
natural effects were implanted in the creature when corporeally
created, so straightway from the beginning the angels were created
in grace.
Reply to Objection 1: Such absence of form in the angels can be