may have continual enjoyment in heaven. Let us afflict ourselves in this
transitory life, that we may attain rest in that which is endless. Let us not be
remiss in this short life, lest we groan in that which is endless.
See ye not how many are here in affliction for the sake of worldly things?
Consider that thou also art one of them, and bear your affliction and your pain,
feeding on the hope of things to come. You are not better than Paul or Peter, who
never obtained rest, who passed all their life in hunger and thirst and nakedness.
If you would attain the same things with them, why do you journey along a
contrary road? If you would arrive at that City, of which they have been deemed
worthy, walk along the path which leads there. The way of ease leads not there,
but that of affliction. The former is broad, the latter is narrow; along this let us
walk, that we may attain eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom, to the
Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be honor, might, power, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 1 on Colossians

[Colossians 1:1, 2]
"Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our
brother, to the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colossæ: Grace
to you, and peace, from God our Father."
Holy indeed are all the Epistles of Paul: but some advantage have those
which he sent after he was in bonds: those, for instance, to the Ephesians and
Philemon: that to Timothy, that to the Philippians, and the one before us: for this
also was sent when he was a prisoner, since he writes in it thus: "for which I am
also in bonds: that I may make it manifest as I ought to speak." [Colossians 4:34] But this Epistle appears to have been written after that to the Romans. For the
one to the Romans he wrote before he had seen them, but this Epistle, after; and
near upon the close of his preaching. And it is evident from hence; that in the
Epistle to Philemon he says, "Being such an one as Paul the aged" [Philemon 9],
and makes request for Onesimus; but in this he sends Onesimus himself, as he
says, "With Onesimus the faithful and beloved brother" [Colossians 4:9]: calling
him faithful, and beloved, and brother. Wherefore also he boldly says in this
Epistle, "from the hope of the Gospel which you heard, which was preached in
all creation under heaven." [Colossians 1:23] For it had now been preached for a
long time. I think then that the Epistle to Timothy was written after this; and
when he was now come to the very end of his life, for there he says, "for I am
already being offered" [2 Timothy 4:6]; this is later however than that to the
Philippians, for in that Epistle he was just entering upon his imprisonment at
Rome.
But why do I say that these Epistles have some advantage over the rest in
this respect, because he writes while in bonds? As if a champion were to write in
the midst of carnage and victory; so also in truth did he. For himself too was