the honor which is from God. But let us, beloved, avoid this disease exceedingly
and with all earnestness; for though we have ten thousand good qualities, this
plague of vainglory is sufficient to bring them all to nought. [John 5:44] If
therefore we desire praise, let us seek the praise which is from God, for the
praise of men of what kind soever it be, as soon as it has appeared has perished,
or if it perish not, brings to us no profit, and often proceeds from a corrupt
judgment. And what is there to be admired in the honor which is from men?
Which young dancers enjoy, and abandoned women, and covetous and rapacious
men? But he who is approved of God, is approved not with these, but with those
holy men the Prophets and Apostles, who have shown forth an angelic life. If we
feel any desire to lead multitudes about with us or be looked at by them, let us
consider the matter apart by itself, and we shall find that it is utterly worthless.
In fine, if you are fond of crowds, draw to yourself the host of angels, and
become terrible to the devils, then shall you care nothing for mortal things, but
shall tread all that is splendid underfoot as mire and clay; and shall clearly see
that nothing so fits a soul for shame as the passion for glory; for it cannot, it
cannot be, that the man who desires this should live the crucified life, as on the
other hand it is not possible that the man who has trodden this underfoot should
not tread down most other passions; for he who masters this will get the better of
envy and covetousness, and all the grievous maladies. "And how," says some
one, "shall we get the better of it?" If we look to the other glory which is from
heaven, and from which this kind strives to cast us out. For that heavenly glory
both makes us honored here, and passes with us into the life which is to come,
and delivers us from all fleshly slavery which we now most miserably serve,
giving up ourselves entirely to earth and the things of earth. For if you go into
the forum, if you enter into a house, into the streets, into the soldiers' quarters,
into inns, taverns, ships, islands, palaces, courts of justice, council chambers,
you shall everywhere find anxiety for things present and belonging to this life,
and each man laboring for these things, whether gone or coming, traveling or
staying at home, voyaging, tilling lands, in the fields, in the cities, in a word, all.

What hope then of salvation have we, when inhabiting God's earth we care not
for the things of God, when bidden to be aliens from earthly things we are aliens
from heaven and citizens of earth? What can be worse than this insensibility,
when hearing each day of the Judgment and of the Kingdom, we imitate the men
in the days of Noah, and those of Sodom, waiting to learn all by actual
experience? Yet for this purpose were all those things written, that if any one
believe not that which is to come, he may, from what has already been, get
certain proof of what shall be. Considering therefore these things, both the past
and the future, let us at least take breath a little from this hard slavery, and make
some account of our souls also, that we may obtain both present and future
blessings; through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.