FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: Although dumb animals do not know the
future, yet an animal is moved by its natural instinct to something
future, as though it foresaw the future. Because this instinct is
planted in them by the Divine Intellect that foresees the future.
Reply to Objection 2: The object of hope is not the possible as
differentiating the true, for thus the possible ensues from the relation
of a predicate to a subject. The object of hope is the possible as
compared to a power. For such is the division of the possible given
in Metaph. v, 12, i.e. into the two kinds we have just mentioned.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the thing which is future does not
come under the object of sight; nevertheless through seeing
something present, an animal's appetite is moved to seek or avoid
something future.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether despair is contrary to hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that despair is not contrary to hope.
Because "to one thing there is one contrary" (Metaph. x, 5). But fear
is contrary to hope. Therefore despair is not contrary to hope.
Objection 2: Further, contraries seem to bear on the same thing. But
hope and despair do not bear on the same thing: since hope regards
the good, whereas despair arises from some evil that is in the way of
obtaining good. Therefore hope is not contrary to despair.
Objection 3: Further, movement is contrary to movement: while
repose is in opposition to movement as a privation thereof. But
despair seems to imply immobility rather than movement. Therefore
it is not contrary to hope, which implies movement of stretching out
towards the hoped-for good.
On the contrary, The very name of despair [desperatio] implies that it
is contrary to hope [spes].
I answer that, As stated above (Question 23, Article 2), there is a
twofold contrariety of movements. One is in respect of approach to
contrary terms: and this contrariety alone is to be found in the
concupiscible passions, for instance between love and hatred. The
other is according to approach and withdrawal with regard to the
same term; and is to be found in the irascible passions, as stated
above (Question 23, Article 2). Now the object of hope, which is the
arduous good, has the character of a principle of attraction, if it be
considered in the light of something attainable; and thus hope tends
thereto, for it denotes a kind of approach. But in so far as it is
considered as unobtainable, it has the character of a principle of
repulsion, because, as stated in Ethic. iii, 3, "when men come to an
impossibility they disperse." And this is how despair stands in
regard to this object, wherefore it implies a movement of withdrawal:
and consequently it is contrary to hope, as withdrawal is to
approach.
Reply to Objection 1: Fear is contrary to hope, because their objects,
i.e. good and evil, are contrary: for this contrariety is found in the
irascible passions, according as they ensue from the passions of the
concupiscible. But despair is contrary to hope, only by contrariety of