SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.5.

The right of patronage cannot be the matter of a direct sale, nor can
it be granted "in fee," but is transferred with the property sold or
granted.
The spiritual right of receiving tithes is not granted to layfolk, but
merely the temporal commodities which are granted in the name of
tithe, as stated above (Question 87, Article 3).
With regard to the granting of benefices it must, however, be
observed, that it is not unlawful for a bishop, before presenting a
person to a benefice, to decide, for some reason, to retain part of the
revenues of the benefice in question, and to spend it on some pious
object. But, on the other hand, if he were to require part of the
revenues of that benefice to be given to him by the beneficiary, it
would be the same as though he demanded payment from him, and
he would not escape the guilt of simony.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether it is lawful to grant spiritual things in

return for an equivalent of service, or for an oral
remuneration?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is lawful to grant spiritual things in
return for an equivalent of service, or an oral remuneration. Gregory
says (Regist. iii, ep. 18): "It is right that those who serve the interests
of the Church should be rewarded." Now an equivalent of service
denotes serving the interests of the Church. Therefore it seems
lawful to confer ecclesiastical benefices for services received.
Objection 2: Further, to confer an ecclesiastical benefice for service
received seems to indicate a carnal intention, no less than to do so
on account of kinship. Yet the latter seemingly is not simoniacal
since it implies no buying or selling. Therefore neither is the former
simoniacal.
Objection 3: Further, that which is done only at another's request
would seem to be done gratis: so that apparently it does not involve
simony, which consists in buying or selling. Now oral remuneration
denotes the conferring of an ecclesiastical benefice at some
person's request. Therefore this is not simoniacal.
Objection 4: Further, hypocrites perform spiritual deeds in order that
they may receive human praise, which seems to imply oral
remuneration: and yet hypocrites are not said to be guilty of simony.
Therefore oral remuneration does not entail simony.
On the contrary, Pope Urban [Urban II, Ep. xvii ad Lucium] says:
"Whoever grants or acquires ecclesiastical things, not for the
purpose for which they were instituted but for his own profit, in
consideration of an oral remuneration or of an equivalent in service
rendered or money received, is guilty of simony."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), the term "money" denotes
"anything that can have a pecuniary value." Now it is evident that a
man's service is directed to some kind of usefulness, which has a
pecuniary value, wherefore servants are hired for a money wage.
Therefore to grant a spiritual thing for a service rendered or to be
rendered is the same as to grant it for the money, received or
promised, at which that service could be valued. If likewise, to grant