1 Corinthians 14:36
"What? Was it from you that the word of God went forth? Or came it unto
you alone?"
Thus he brings in the other Churches also as holding this law, both abating
the disturbance by consideration of the novelty of the thing, and by the general
voice making his saying acceptable. Wherefore also elsewhere he said, "Who
shall put you in remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, even as I teach
everywhere in all the Churches." [1 Corinthians 4:17] And again, "God is not a
God of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the saints." [1
Corinthians 14:33] And here, "What? Was it from you that the word of God went
forth? Or came it unto you alone?" i.e., "neither first, nor alone are you
believers, but the whole world. " Which also writing to the Colossians he said,
"even as it is bearing fruit and increasing in all the world," [Colossians 1:6]
speaking of the Gospel.
But he turns it also at another time to the encouragement of his hearers; as
when he says that theirs were the first fruits, and were manifest unto all. Thus,
writing to the Thessalonians he said, "For from you has sounded forth the word
of God," and, "in every place your faith to God-ward is gone forth." [1
Thessalonians 1:8] And again to the Romans, "Your faith is proclaimed
throughout the whole world." For both are apt to shame and stir up, as well the
being commended of others, as that they have others partakers in their judgment.
Wherefore also here he says; "What? Was it from you that the word of God went
forth? Or came it unto you only?" "For neither can you say this," says he; "we
were made teachers to the rest, and it cannot be right for us to learn of others;"
nor, "the faith remained in this place only, and no precedents from other quarters
ought to be received." Do you see by how many arguments he put them to
shame? He introduced the law, he signified the shamefulness of the thing, he

brought forward the other Churches.
3. Next, what is strongest of all he puts last, saying, "God ordains these
things even at this time by me."

1 Corinthians 14:37
Thus: "if any man thinks himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him take
knowledge of the things which I write unto you that they are the commandments
of the Lord."

1 Corinthians 14:38
"But if any man is ignorant, let him be ignorant."
And wherefore did he add this? Intimating that he is not using violence nor
contention, which is a sign of them who wish not to set up their own things, but
aim at what is profitable to others. Wherefore also in another place he says, "But
if any man seems to be contentious, we have no such custom." [1 Corinthians
11:16] But he does not this everywhere, but only where the offenses are not very
great, and then rather as putting them to shame. Since when he discourses of
other sins, he speaks not thus. But how? "Be not deceived: neither fornicators,
nor effeminate, shall inherit the kingdom of God." [1 Corinthians 6:9-10] And
again, "Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you receive circumcision, Christ will
profit you nothing." [Galatians 5:2] But here, since his discourse was of silence,
he does not very keenly inveigh against them, by this very thing attracting them
the more. Then, as he is ever wont to do, unto the former subject whence he
digressed to say these things, he brings back his discourse as follows: