friends, and that they should subject themselves to another kingdom.
But if this be foolish, what follows is much more foolish. Of what nature
then is this? That after they had entered on so long a journey, and worshipped,
and thrown all into confusion, they went away immediately. And what sign at all
of royalty did they behold, when they saw a shed, and a manger, and a child in
swaddling clothes, and a poor mother? And to whom moreover did they offer
their gifts, and for what intent? Was it then usual and customary, thus to pay
court to the kings that were born in every place? And did they always keep going
about the whole world, worshipping them who they knew should become kings
out of a low and mean estate, before they ascended the royal throne? Nay, this no
one can say.
And for what purpose did they worship Him at all? If for the sake of things
present, then what did they expect to receive from an infant, and a mother of
mean condition? If for things future, then whence did they know that the child
whom they had worshipped in swaddling clothes would remember what was
then done? But if His mother was to remind Him, not even so were they worthy
of honor, but of punishment, as bringing Him into danger which they must have
foreseen. Thence at any rate it was that Herod was troubled, and sought, and
pried, and took in hand to slay Him. And indeed everywhere, he who makes
known the future king, supposing him in his earliest age in a private condition,
does nothing else than betray him to slaughter, and kindle against him endless
warfare.
Do you see how manifold the absurdities appear, if we examine these
transactions according to the course of human things and ordinary custom? For
not these topics only, but more than these might be mentioned, containing more
matter for questions than what we have spoken of. But lest, stringing questions
upon questions, we should bewilder you, come let us now enter upon the
solution of the matters inquired of, making a beginning of our solution with the
star itself.
3. For if you can learn what the star was, and of what kind, and whether it

were one of the common stars, or new and unlike the rest, and whether it was a
star by nature or a star in appearance only, we shall easily know the other things
also. Whence then will these points be manifest? From the very things that are
written. Thus, that this star was not of the common sort, or rather not a star at all,
as it seems at least to me, but some invisible power transformed into this
appearance, is in the first place evident from its very course. For there is not,
there is not any star that moves by this way, but whether it be the sun you
mention, or the moon, or all the other stars, we see them going from east to west;
but this was wafted from north to south; for so is Palestine situated with respect
to Persia.
In the second place, one may see this from the time also. For it appears not
in the night, but in mid-day, while the sun is shining; and this is not within the
power of a star, nay not of the moon; for the moon that so much surpasses all,
when the beams of the sun appear, straightway hides herself, and vanishes away.
But this by the excess of its own splendor overcame even the beams of the sun,
appearing brighter than they, and in so much light shining out more illustriously.
In the third place, from its appearing, and hiding itself again. For on their
way as far as Palestine it appeared leading them, but after they set foot within
Jerusalem, it hid itself: then again, when they had left Herod, having told him on
what account they came, and were on the point of departing, it shows itself; all
which is not like the motion of a star, but of some power highly endued with
reason. For it had not even any course at all of its own, but when they were to
move, it moved; when to stand, it stood, dispensing all as need required: in the
same kind of way as the pillar of the cloud, now halting and now rousing up the
camp of the Jews, when it was needful.
In the fourth place, one may perceive this clearly, from its mode of pointing
Him out. For it did not, remaining on high, point out the place; it not being
possible for them so to ascertain it, but it came down and performed this office.
For you know that a spot of so small dimensions, being only as much as a shed
would occupy, or rather as much as the body of a little infant would take up,