salvation, no not even by the help of others; if, on the other hand, we be
watchful, we shall be able to do this by ourselves, and by ourselves rather than
by others. Yes; for God is more willing to give His grace to us, than to others for
us; that we by endeavoring ourselves to do away His wrath, may both enjoy
confidence towards Him, and become better men. Thus He had pity on the
Canaanitish woman, thus He saved the harlot, thus the thief, when there was
none to be mediator nor advocate.
8. And this I say, not that we may omit supplicating the saints, but to hinder
our being careless, and entrusting our concerns to others only, while we fall back
and slumber ourselves. For so when He said, "make to yourselves friends," he
did not stop at this only, but He added, "of the unrighteous mammon;" that so
again the good work may be your own; for it is nothing else but almsgiving
which He has here signified. And, what is marvellous, neither does He make a
strict account with us, if we withdraw ourselves from injustice. For what He says
is like this: "Have you gained ill? Spend well. Have you gathered by
unrighteousness? Scatter abroad in righteousness." And yet, what manner of
virtue is this, to give out of such gains? God, however, being full of love to man,
condescends even to this and if we thus do, promises us many good things. But
we are so past all feeling, as not to give even of our unjust gain, but while
plundering without end, if we contribute the smallest part, we think we have
fulfilled all. Have you not heard Paul saying, "He which sows sparingly, shall
reap also sparingly"? act an outlay? Is it an expense? Nay, it is gain and good
merchandise. Where there is merchandise, there is also increase; where there is
sowing, there is also reaping. But you, if you had to till a rich and deep soil, and
capable of receiving much seed, would both spend what you had, and would
borrow of other men, accounting parsimony in such cases to be loss; but, when it
is Heaven which you are to cultivate, which is exposed to no variation of
weather, and will surely repay your outlay with abundant increase, you are slow
and backward, and considerest not that it is possible by sparing to lose, and by
not sparing to gain.

9. Disperse therefore, that you may not lose; keep not, that you may keep;
lay out, that you may save; spend, that you may gain. If your treasures are to be
hoarded, do not thou hoard them, for you will surely cast them away; but entrust
them to God, for thence no man makes spoil of them. Do not thou traffic, for you
know not at all how to gain; but lend unto Him who gives an interest greater than
the principal. Lend, where is no envy, no accusation, nor evil design, nor fear.
Lend unto Him who wants nothing, yet has need for your sake; who feeds all
men, yet is an hungered, that you may not suffer famine; who is poor, that you
may be rich. Lend there, where your return cannot be death, but life instead of
death. For this usury is the harbinger of a kingdom, that, of hell; the one coming
of covetousness, the other of self-denial; the one of cruelty, the other of
humanity. What excuse then will be ours, when having the power to receive
more, and that with security, and in due season, and in great freedom, without
either reproaches, or fears, or dangers, we let go these gains, and follow after
that other sort, base and vile as they are, insecure and perishable, and greatly
aggravating the furnace for us? For nothing, nothing is baser than the usury of
this world, nothing more cruel. Why, other persons' calamities are such a man's
traffic; he makes himself gain of the distress of another, and demands wages for
kindness, as though he were afraid to seem merciful, and under the cloak of
kindness he digs the pitfall deeper, by the act of help galling a man's poverty, and
in the act of stretching out the hand thrusting him down, and when receiving him
as in harbor, involving him in shipwreck, as on a rock, or shoal, or reef.
"But what do you require?" says one; "that I should give another for his use
that money which I have got together, and which is to me useful, and demand no
recompense?" Far from it: I say not this: yea, I earnestly desire that you should
have a recompense; not however a mean nor small one, but far greater; for in
return for gold, I would that you should receive Heaven for usury. Why then shut
yourself up in poverty, crawling about the earth, and demanding little for great?
Nay, this is the part of one who knows not how to be rich. For when God in
return for a little money is promising you the good things that are in Heaven, and