hymn and unfold it all, that seeing the profit thereof, we too may chant it
constantly over our table, and quell the rude motions of the belly, introducing
both the manners and laws of those angels into our houses. For you ought indeed
to go there and reap these fruits; but since you are not willing, at least through
our words, hear this spiritual melody, and let every one after his meal say these
words, beginning thus.
"Blessed God." For the apostolic law they straightway fulfill, that
commands, "Whatsoever we do in word or in deed, that we do it in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God and the Father by Him."
[Colossians 3:17]
Next, the thanksgiving takes place not for that one day only, but for all their
life. For, "Who feedest me," it is said, "from my youth up." And a lesson of selfcommand is drawn thence, that when God feeds, we must not take thought. For
if upon a king's promising you to furnish your daily food out of his own stores,
you would be of good hope for the future; much more, when God gives, and all
things pour upon you as out of fountains, should you be freed from all anxiety.
Yea, and to this very intent they so speak, that they may persuade both
themselves, and those that are made disciples by them, to put off all worldly
care.
Then, not to have you suppose that for themselves only they offer up this
thanksgiving, they further say, "Who givest food to all flesh," giving thanks in
behalf of all the world; and as fathers of the whole earth, so do they offer up
their praises for all, and train themselves to a sincere brotherly love. For it is not
even possible they should hate them, in behalf of whom they thank God, that
they are fed.
Do you see both charity introduced by their thanksgiving, and worldly care
cast out, both by the preceding words, and by these? For if He feed all flesh,
much more them that are devoted to him; if them that are entangled in worldly
cares, much more them that are freed from the same.
To establish this, Christ Himself said, "How many sparrows do ye exceed in

value?" And He said it, teaching them not to put their confidence in wealth and
land and seeds; for it is not these that feed us, but the word of God.
Hereby they stop the mouths, both of the Manichæans, and of them of
Valentinus, and of all that are diseased in their way. For sure this Being is not
evil, who sets his own stores before all, even before them that blaspheme Him.
Then comes the petition: "Fill our hearts with joy and gladness." With what
manner of joy then, does it mean? The joy of this world? God forbid: for had
they meant this, they would not have occupied summits of mountains, and
deserts, nor wrapt themselves in sackcloth; but that joy they mean, which has
nothing in common with this present life, the joy of angels, the joy above.
And they do not simply ask for it, but in great excess; for they say not,
"give," but, "fill," and they say not "us," but "our hearts." For this is especially a
heart's joy; "For the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace." [Galatians 5:22]
Thus, because sin brought in sorrow, they request that through joy
righteousness may be implanted in them, for no otherwise might joy be
engendered.
"That, always having all sufficiency, we may abound unto every good
work." [2 Corinthians 9:8] See how they fulfill that word of the gospel which
says, "Give us this day our daily bread," and how they seek even this for
spiritual ends. For their phrase is, "That we may abound unto every good work."
They said not, "That we may do our duty only," but "even more than what is
enjoined," for, "that we may abound," means this. And while of God they seek
sufficiency in things needful, themselves are willing to obey not in sufficiency
only, but with much abundance, and in all things. This is the part of welldisposed servants, this of men strict in goodness, to abound always, and in all
things.
Then again reminding themselves of their own weakness, and that without
the influence from above nothing noble can be done; having said, "that we may
abound unto every good work," they add, "in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom
unto You be glory, honor, and might forever. Amen;" framing this end like their