while time is a measure of movement. Supposing, however, that the
aforesaid difference be considered on the part of the things
measured, and not as regards the measures, then there is some
reason for it, inasmuch as that alone is measured by time which has
beginning and end in time. Hence, if the movement of the heavens
lasted always, time would not be of its measure as regards the whole
of its duration, since the infinite is not measurable; but it would be
the measure of that part of its revolution which has beginning and
end in time.
Another reason for the same can be taken from these measures in
themselves, if we consider the end and the beginning as
potentialities; because, granted also that time always goes on, yet it
is possible to note in time both the beginning and the end, by
considering its parts: thus we speak of the beginning and the end of
a day or of a year; which cannot be applied to eternity. Still these
differences follow upon the essential and primary differences, that
eternity is simultaneously whole, but that time is not so.
Reply to Objection 1: Such a reason would be a valid one if time and
eternity were the same kind of measure; but this is seen not to be the
case when we consider those things of which the respective
measures are time and eternity.
Reply to Objection 2: The "now" of time is the same as regards its
subject in the whole course of time, but it differs in aspect; for
inasmuch as time corresponds to movement, its "now" corresponds
to what is movable; and the thing movable has the same one subject
in all time, but differs in aspect a being here and there; and such
alteration is movement. Likewise the flow of the "now" as alternating
in aspect is time. But eternity remains the same according to both
subject and aspect; and hence eternity is not the same as the "now"
of time.
Reply to Objection 3: As eternity is the proper measure of permanent
being, so time is the proper measure of movement; and hence,
according as any being recedes from permanence of being, and is
subject to change, it recedes from eternity, and is subject to time.
Therefore the being of things corruptible, because it is changeable,
is not measured by eternity, but by time; for time measures not only
things actually changed, but also things changeable; hence it not
only measures movement but it also measures repose, which
belongs to whatever is naturally movable, but is not actually in

motion.

### ARTICLE 5. The difference of aeviternity and time.

Objection 1: It seems that aeviternity is the same as time. For
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii, 20,22,23), that "God moves the
spiritual through time." But aeviternity is said to be the measure of
spiritual substances. Therefore time is the same as aeviternity.
Objection 2: Further, it is essential to time to have "before" and
"after"; but it is essential to eternity to be simultaneously whole, as
was shown above in the first article. Now aeviternity is not eternity;
for it is written (Ecclus. 1:1) that eternal "Wisdom is before age."
Therefore it is not simultaneously whole but has "before" and
"after"; and thus it is the same as time.
Objection 3: Further, if there is no "before" and "after" in aeviternity,
it follows that in aeviternal things there is no difference between
being, having been, or going to be. Since then it is impossible for
aeviternal things not to have been, it follows that it is impossible for
them not to be in the future; which is false, since God can reduce
them to nothing.
Objection 4: Further, since the duration of aeviternal things is infinite
as to subsequent duration, if aeviternity is simultaneously whole, it
follows that some creature is actually infinite; which is impossible.
Therefore aeviternity does not differ from time.
On the contrary, Boethius says (De Consol. iii) "Who commandest
time to be separate from aeviternity."
I answer that, Aeviternity differs from time, and from eternity, as the
mean between them both. This difference is explained by some to
consist in the fact that eternity has neither beginning nor end,
aeviternity, a beginning but no end, and time both beginning and
end. This difference, however, is but an accidental one, as was
shown above, in the preceding article; because even if aeviternal
things had always been, and would always be, as some think, and
even if they might sometimes fail to be, which is possible to God to
allow; even granted this, aeviternity would still be distinguished from
eternity, and from time.
Others assign the difference between these three to consist in the