SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.4.

is borne towards things higher than what become him. Consequently
whatsoever things lead a man to inordinate self-esteem lead him to
pride: and one of those is the observing of other people's failings,
just as, on the other hand, in the words of Gregory (Moral. xxiii, 17),
"holy men, by a like observation of other people's virtues, set others
above themselves." Accordingly the conclusion is not that pride is in
the rational faculty, but that one of its causes is in the reason.
Reply to Objection 3: Pride is in the irascible, not only as a part of
the sensitive appetite, but also as having a more general
signification, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 4: According to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xiv, 7,9),
"love precedes all other emotions of the soul, and is their cause,"
wherefore it may be employed to denote any of the other emotions. It
is in this sense that pride is said to be "love of one's own
excellence," inasmuch as love makes a man presume inordinately on
his superiority over others, and this belongs properly to pride.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the four species of pride are fittingly

assigned by Gregory?
Objection 1: It seems that the four species of pride are unfittingly
assigned by Gregory, who says (Moral. xxiii, 6): "There are four
marks by which every kind of pride of the arrogant betrays itself;
either when they think that their good is from themselves, or if they
believe it to be from above, yet they think that it is due to their own
merits; or when they boast of having what they have not, or despise
others and wish to appear the exclusive possessors of what they
have." For pride is a vice distinct from unbelief, just as humility is a
distinct virtue from faith. Now it pertains to unbelief, if a man deem
that he has not received his good from God, or that he has the good
of grace through his own merits. Therefore this should not be
reckoned a species of pride.
Objection 2: Further, the same thing should not be reckoned a
species of different genera. Now boasting is reckoned a species of
lying, as stated above (Question 110, Article 2; Question 112).
Therefore it should not be accounted a species of pride.
Objection 3: Further, some other things apparently pertain to pride,
which are not mentioned here. For Jerome says that "nothing is so
indicative of pride as to show oneself ungrateful": and Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 14) that "it belongs to pride to excuse oneself
of a sin one has committed." Again, presumption whereby one aims
at having what is above one, would seem to have much to do with
pride. Therefore the aforesaid division does not sufficiently account
for the different species of pride.
Objection 4: Further, we find other divisions of pride. For Anselm
[Eadmer, De Similit. xxii, seqq.] divides the uplifting of pride, saying
that there is "pride of will, pride of speech, end pride of deed."
Bernard [De Grad. Humil. et Superb. x, seqq.] also reckons twelve
degrees of pride, namely "curiosity, frivolity of mind, senseless
mirth, boasting, singularity, arrogance, presumption, defense of
one's sins, deceitful confession, rebelliousness, license, sinful
habit." Now these apparently are not comprised under the species
mentioned by Gregory. Therefore the latter would seem to be
assigned unfittingly.