SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.37, C.2.

calls one of the rhetorical colors (De Rhet. ad Heren. iv), where he
says that "it consists in developing a speech from contrary things,"
for instance: "Adulation has a pleasant beginning, and a most bitter
end."
Now contrariety of speech may be looked at in two ways: first with
regard to the intention of the contentious party, secondly, with
regard to the manner of contending. As to the intention, we must
consider whether he contends against the truth, and then he is to be
blamed, or against falsehood, and then he should be praised. As to
the manner, we must consider whether his manner of contending is
in keeping with the persons and the matter in dispute, for then it
would be praiseworthy, hence Tully says (De Rhet. ad Heren. iii) that
"contention is a sharp speech suitable for proof and refutation"---or
whether it exceeds the demands of the persons and matter in
dispute, in which case it is blameworthy.
Accordingly if we take contention as denoting a disclaimer of the
truth and an inordinate manner, it is a mortal sin. Thus Ambrose
[Gloss. Ord. in Rom. i, 29] defines contention: "Contention is a
disclaimer of the truth with clamorous confidence." If, however,
contention denote a disavowal of what is false, with the proper
measure of acrimony, it is praiseworthy: whereas, if it denote a
disavowal of falsehood, together with an inordinate manner, it can be
a venial sin, unless the contention be conducted so inordinately, as
to give scandal to others. Hence the Apostle after saying (2 Tim.
2:14): "Contend not in words," adds, "for it is to no profit, but to the
subverting of the hearers."
Reply to Objection 1: The disciples of Christ contended together, not
with the intention of disclaiming the truth, since each one stood up
for what he thought was true. Yet there was inordinateness in their
contention, because they contended about a matter which they
ought not to have contended about, viz. the primacy of honor; for
they were not spiritual men as yet, as a gloss says on the same
passage; and for this reason Our Lord checked them.
Reply to Objection 2: Those who preached Christ "out of
contention," were to be blamed, because, although they did not
gainsay the truth of faith, but preached it, yet they did gainsay the
truth, by the fact that they thought they would "raise affliction" to the
Apostle who was preaching the truth of faith. Hence the Apostle
rejoiced not in their contention, but in the fruit that would result

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.37, C.2.

therefrom, namely that Christ would be made known---since evil is
sometimes the occasion of good results.
Reply to Objection 3: Contention is complete and is a mortal sin
when, in contending before a judge, a man gainsays the truth of
justice, or in a disputation, intends to impugn the true doctrine. In
this sense Catholics do not contend against heretics, but the
reverse. But when, whether in court or in a disputation, it is
incomplete, i.e. in respect of the acrimony of speech, it is not always
a mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 4: Contention here denotes an ordinary dispute.
For Job had said (13:3): "I will speak to the Almighty, and I desire to
reason with God": yet he intended not to impugn the truth, but to
defend it, and in seeking the truth thus, he had no wish to be
inordinate in mind or in speech.