when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers
of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down have come
hither also; whom Jason has received: and these all do contrary to the decrees of
Cæsar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus. [Acts 17:5-7] Oh! What an
accusation! Again they get up a charge of treason against them, "saying, there is
another king (one) Jesus. And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city,
when they heard these things. And when they had taken security of Jason, and of
the other, they let them go." (v. 8, 9.) A man worthy to be admired, that he put
himself into danger, and sent them away from it. "And the brethren immediately
sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea: who coming there went into the
synagogue of the Jews. These were more noble," it says, "than they of
Thessalonica: more noble," i.e. more gentle ([ἐ] [πιεικέστεροι]) (in their
behavior): "in that they received the word with all readiness," and this not
inconsiderately, but with a strictness wherein was no passion, "searching the
Scriptures whether these things were so." (v. 10, 11.) "Therefore many of them
believed; also of honorable women which were Greeks, and of men, not a few.
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was
preached of Paul at Berea, they came there also, and stirred up the people. And
then immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea: but
Silas and Timotheus abode there still." [Acts 17:12-14] See how he at one time
gives way, at another presses on, and in many things takes his measures upon
human considerations. "And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens:
and receiving a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him with
speed, they departed." [Acts 17:15] But let us look again at what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "Three sabbath-days," it says, being the time when they
had leisure from work, "he reasoned with them, opening out of the Scriptures"
[Acts 17:2]: for so used Christ also to do: as on many occasions we find Him
reasoning from the Scriptures, and not on all occasions (urging men) by
miracles. Because to this indeed they stood in a posture of hostility, calling them
deceivers and jugglers; but he that persuades men by reasons from the

Scriptures, is not liable to this imputation. And on many occasions we find
(Paul) to have convinced men simply by force of teaching: and in Antioch "the
whole city was gathered together" [Acts 13:44]: so great a thing is this also, for
indeed this itself is no small miracle, nay, it is even a very great one. And that
they might not think that they did it all by their own strength, but rather that God
permitted it, two things resulted, namely, "Some of them were persuaded," etc.
(c) "And of devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few:"
but those others did the contrary: "the Jews moved with envy," etc. (v. 4, 5) (b)
and, from the fact that the being called was itself a matter of God's fore-ordering,
(a) they neither thought great things of themselves as if the triumph were their
own, nor were terrified as being responsible (for all). But how comes it that he
said, "That we should go unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision"
[Galatians 2:9], and yet discoursed to the Jews? ([α]) He did this as a thing over
and above. ([β]) For he did other things also more than he was obliged. For
instance, Christ ordained that they should "live by the Gospel" [1 Corinthians
9:14; 1:17], but our Apostle did it not: Christ sent him not to baptize, yet he did
baptize. Mark how he was equal to all. Peter to the circumcision, he to the
Gentiles, to the greater part. ([α]) Since if it was necessary for him to discourse
to Jews, how said he again: "For He that wrought effectually in him toward the
circumcision, the same was mighty also in me toward the Gentiles" [Galatians
2:8]? In the same way as those Apostles also had intercourse with the Gentiles,
though they had been set apart for the circumcision, so likewise did our Apostle.
The more part of his work indeed was with the Gentiles: still he did not neglect
the Jews either, that they might not seem to be severed from them. And how was
it, you will ask, that he entered in the first place into the synagogues, as if this
were his leading object? True; but he persuaded the Gentiles through the Jews,
and from the things which he discoursed of to the Jews. And he knew, that this
was most suitable for the Gentiles, and most conducive to belief. Therefore he
says: Inasmuch as I am the "Apostle of the Gentiles." [Romans 11:13] And his
Epistles too all fight against the Jews.— "That the Christ," he says, "must needs