FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.4.

the soul are said to be inordinate, when they are not subject to the
order of reason, for the reason is the ruling power of the soul's parts.
Accordingly, when the concupiscible or irascible power is affected
by any passion contrary to the order of reason, the result being that
an impediment arises in the aforesaid manner to the due action of
man, it is said to be a sin of weakness. Hence the Philosopher (Ethic.
vii, 8) compares the incontinent man to an epileptic, whose limbs
move in a manner contrary to his intention.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as in the body the stronger the movement
against the order of nature, the greater the weakness, so likewise,
the stronger the movement of passion against the order of reason,
the greater the weakness of the soul.
Reply to Objection 2: Sin consists chiefly in an act of the will, which
is not hindered by weakness of the body: for he that is weak in body
may have a will ready for action, and yet be hindered by a passion,
as stated above (Article 1). Hence when we speak of sins of
weakness, we refer to weakness of soul rather than of body. And yet
even weakness of soul is called weakness of the flesh, in so far as it
is owing to a condition of the flesh that the passions of the soul arise
in us through the sensitive appetite being a power using a corporeal
organ.
Reply to Objection 3: It is in the will's power to give or refuse its
consent to what passion inclines us to do, and it is in this sense that
our appetite is said to be under us; and yet this consent or dissent of
the will is hindered in the way already explained (Article 1).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether self-love is the source of every sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that self-love is not the source of every
sin. For that which is good and right in itself is not the proper cause
of sin. Now love of self is a good and right thing in itself: wherefore
man is commanded to love his neighbor as himself (Lev. 19:18).
Therefore self-love cannot be the proper cause of sin.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (Rm. 7:8): "Sin taking
occasion by the commandment wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence"; on which words a gloss says that "the law is good,
since by forbidding concupiscence, it forbids all evils," the reason
for which is that concupiscence is the cause of every sin. Now
concupiscence is a distinct passion from love, as stated above
(Question 3, Article 2; Question 23, Article 4). Therefore self-love is
not the cause of every sin.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine in commenting on Ps. 79:17, "Things
set on fire and dug down," says that "every sin is due either to love
arousing us to undue ardor or to fear inducing false humility."
Therefore self-love is not the only cause of sin.
Objection 4: Further, as man sins at times through inordinate love of
self, so does he sometimes through inordinate love of his neighbor.
Therefore self-love is not the cause of every sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28) that "self-love,
amounting to contempt of God, builds up the city of Babylon." Now
every sin makes man a citizen of Babylon. Therefore self-love is the
cause of every sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 75, Article 1), the proper
and direct cause of sin is to be considered on the part of the
adherence to a mutable good; in which respect every sinful act
proceeds from inordinate desire for some temporal good. Now the
fact that anyone desires a temporal good inordinately, is due to the
fact that he loves himself inordinately; for to wish anyone some
good is to love him. Therefore it is evident that inordinate love of self
is the cause of every sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Well ordered self-love, whereby man desires a