SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.2.

exchange or agency of prebends or ecclesiastical benefices to be
made by authority of the parties concerned without danger of
committing simony, as laid down by law [Cap. Quaesitum, de rerum
Permutat.; cap. Super, de Transact.]. Nevertheless the superior, in
virtue of his office, can cause these exchanges to be made for useful
or necessary reasons.
Reply to Objection 6: Even as the soul lives by itself, while the body
lives through being united to the soul; so, too, certain things are
spiritual by themselves, such as the sacraments and the like, while
others are called spiritual, through adhering to those others. Hence
(I, qu. iii, cap. Siquis objecerit) it is stated that "spiritual things do
not progress without corporal things, even as the soul has no bodily
life without the body."
Reply to Objection 7: The Pope can be guilty of the vice of simony,
like any other man, since the higher a man's position the more
grievous is his sin. For although the possessions of the Church
belong to him as dispenser in chief, they are not his as master and
owner. Therefore, were he to accept money from the income of any
church in exchange for a spiritual thing, he would not escape being
guilty of the vice of simony. In like manner he might commit simony
by accepting from a layman moneys not belonging to the goods of
the Church.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is always unlawful to give money for

the sacraments?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not always unlawful to give
money for the sacraments. Baptism is the door of the sacraments, as
we shall state in the TP, Question 68, Article 6; TP, Question 73,
Article 3. But seemingly it is lawful in certain cases to give money for
Baptism, for instance if a priest were unwilling to baptize a dying
child without being paid. Therefore it is not always unlawful to buy or
sell the sacraments.
Objection 2: Further, the greatest of the sacraments is the Eucharist,
which is consecrated in the Mass. But some priests receive a
prebend or money for singing masses. Much more therefore is it
lawful to buy or sell the other sacraments.
Objection 3: Further, the sacrament of Penance is a necessary
sacrament consisting chiefly in the absolution. But some persons
demand money when absolving from excommunication. Therefore it
is not always unlawful to buy or sell a sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, custom makes that which otherwise were sinful
to be not sinful; thus Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxii, 47) that "it
was no crime to have several wives, so long as it was the custom."
Now it is the custom in some places to give something in the
consecration of bishops, blessings of abbots, ordinations of the
clergy, in exchange for the chrism, holy oil, and so forth. Therefore it
would seem that it is not unlawful.
Objection 5: Further, it happens sometimes that someone
maliciously hinders a person from obtaining a bishopric or some like
dignity. But it is lawful for a man to make good his grievance.
Therefore it is lawful, seemingly, in such a case to give money for a
bishopric or a like ecclesiastical dignity.
Objection 6: Further, marriage is a sacrament. But sometimes money
is given for marriage. Therefore it is lawful to sell a sacrament.
On the contrary, It is written (I, qu. i [Can. Qui per pecunias]):
"Whosoever shall consecrate anyone for money, let him be cut off
from the priesthood."