SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.8.

Master of unity did not wish us to pray privately, that is for ourselves
alone, for He wished each one to pray for all, even as He Himself
bore all in one."
Reply to Objection 2: It is a condition of prayer that one pray for
oneself: not as though it were necessary in order that prayer be
meritorious, but as being necessary in order that prayer may not fail
in its effect of impetration. For it sometimes happens that we pray for
another with piety and perseverance, and ask for things relating to
his salvation, and yet it is not granted on account of some obstacle
on the part of the person we are praying for, according to Jer. 15:1,
"If Moses and Samuel shall stand before Me, My soul is not towards
this people." And yet the prayer will be meritorious for the person
who prays thus out of charity, according to Ps. 34:13, "My prayer
shall be turned into my bosom, i.e. though it profit them not, I am not
deprived of my reward," as the gloss expounds it.
Reply to Objection 3: We ought to pray even for sinners, that they
may be converted, and for the just that they may persevere and
advance in holiness. Yet those who pray are heard not for all sinners
but for some: since they are heard for the predestined, but not for
those who are foreknown to death; even as the correction whereby
we correct the brethren, has an effect in the predestined but not in
the reprobate, according to Eccles. 7:14, "No man can correct whom
God hath despised." Hence it is written (1 Jn. 5:16): "He that knoweth
his brother to sin a sin which is not to death, let him ask, and life
shall be given to him, who sinneth not to death." Now just as the
benefit of correction must not be refused to any man so long as he
lives here below, because we cannot distinguish the predestined
from the reprobate, as Augustine says (De Correp. et Grat. xv), so
too no man should be denied the help of prayer.
We ought also to pray for the just for three reasons: First, because
the prayers of a multitude are more easily heard, wherefore a gloss
on Rm. 15:30, "Help me in your prayers," says: "The Apostle rightly
tells the lesser brethren to pray for him, for many lesser ones, if they
be united together in one mind, become great, and it is impossible
for the prayers of a multitude not to obtain" that which is possible to
be obtained by prayer. Secondly, that many may thank God for the
graces conferred on the just, which graces conduce to the profit of
many, according to the Apostle (2 Cor. 1:11). Thirdly, that the more
perfect may not wax proud, seeing that they find that they need the
prayers of the less perfect.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.8.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether we ought to pray for our enemies?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to pray for our
enemies. According to Rm. 15:4, "what things soever were written,
were written for our learning." Now Holy Writ contains many
imprecations against enemies; thus it is written (Ps. 6:11): "Let all
my enemies be ashamed and be . . . troubled, let them be ashamed
and be troubled very speedily." Therefore we too should pray against
rather than for our enemies.
Objection 2: Further, to be revenged on one's enemies is harmful to
them. But holy men seek vengeance of their enemies according to
Apoc. 6:10, "How long . . . dost Thou not . . . revenge our blood on
them that dwell on earth?" Wherefore they rejoice in being revenged
on their enemies, according to Ps. 57:11, "The just shall rejoice when
he shall see the revenge." Therefore we should not pray for our
enemies, but against them.
Objection 3: Further, man's deed should not be contrary to his
prayer. Now sometimes men lawfully attack their enemies, else all
wars would be unlawful, which is opposed to what we have said
above (Question 40, Article 1). Therefore we should not pray for our
enemies.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 5:44): "Pray for them that persecute
and calumniate you."
I answer that, To pray for another is an act of charity, as stated
above (Article 7). Wherefore we are bound to pray for our enemies in
the same manner as we are bound to love them. Now it was
explained above in the treatise on charity (Question 25, Articles 8,9),
how we are bound to love our enemies, namely, that we must love in
them their nature, not their sin. and that to love our enemies in
general is a matter of precept, while to love them in the individual is
not a matter of precept, except in the preparedness of the mind, so
that a man must be prepared to love his enemy even in the individual
and to help him in a case of necessity, or if his enemy should beg his
forgiveness. But to love one's enemies absolutely in the individual,
and to assist them, is an act of perfection.
In like manner it is a matter of obligation that we should not exclude