what is the matter: he could not in the least tell what the other was going to say
to him, but supposed merely that he was about to receive some (lesson of)
prophecy. And moreover, this was more respectful, that he did not draw him into
his chariot, but besought him. "And Philip," we have read, "ran to him, and
heard him reading;" even the fact of his running, showed that he wished to say
(something). "And the place," it says, "of the Scripture which he read was this:
As a sheep He was led to the slaughter." [Acts 8:32] And this circumstance, also,
is a token of his elevated mind, ([φιλοσοφίας]) that he had in hand this prophet,
who is more sublime than all others. Philip does not relate matters to him just as
it might happen, but quietly: nay, does not say anything until he is questioned.
Both in the former instance he prayed him, and so he does now, saying, "I pray
you of whom speaks the prophet this?" That he should at all know either that the
Prophets speak in different ways about different persons, or that they speak of
themselves in another person— the question betokens a very thoughtful mind.
Let us be put to shame, both poor and rich, by this eunuch. Then, it says, "they
came to a certain water, and he said, Lo, here is water." [Acts 8:36] Again, of
his own accord he requests, saying, "What does hinder me to be baptized?" And
see again his modesty: he does not say, Baptize me, neither does he hold his
peace; but he utters somewhat midway between strong desire and reverent fear,
saying, "What does hinder me?" Do you observe that he has the doctrines (of
faith) perfect? For indeed the Prophet had the whole, Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, Judgment to come. And if he shows exceeding
earnestness of desire, do not marvel. Be ashamed, all you as many as are
unbaptized. "And," it says, "he commanded the chariot to stand still." [Acts
8:38] He spoke, and gave the order at the same moment, before hearing (Philip's
answer). "And when they had come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
caught away Philip;" [Acts 8:39] in order that the occurrence might be shown to
be of God; that he might not consider it to be merely man. "And he went," it
says, "on his way rejoicing." (P. 121, note 2.) This hints, that he would have been
grieved had he known: for the greatness of his joy, having had the Spirit also

vouchsafed to him, he did not even see things present— "But Philip was found at
Azotus." [Acts 8:40] Great was the gain to Philip also:— that which he heard
concerning the Prophets, concerning Habakkuk, concerning Ezekiel, and the
rest, he saw done in his own person. [Daniel 14:36; Ezekiel 3:12] Thence it
appears that he went a long distance, seeing he "was found at Azotus." (The
Spirit) set him there, where he was thenceforth to preach: "And passing through,
he preached in all the cities, until he came to Cæsarea."
"And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, and desired of him letters to
Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were
men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem." [ch. 9:1-2] He fitly
mentions Paul's zeal, and shows that in the very midst of his zeal he is drawn.
"Yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter," and not yet sated with the murder
of Stephen, he was not yet glutted with the persecution of the Church, and the
dispersion. Lo, this was fulfilled which was spoken by Christ, that "they which
kill you shall think they offer worship to God." [John 16:2] He then in this wise
did it, not as the Jews: God forbid! For that he did it through zeal, is manifest
from his going abroad even to strange cities: whereas they would not have cared
even for those in Jerusalem; they were for one thing only, to enjoy honor. But
why went he to Damascus? It was a great city, a royal city: he was afraid lest that
should be preoccupied. And observe his strong desire and ardor (and), how
strictly according to the Law he went to work: he goes not to the governor, but
"to the priest. That if he found any of this way:" for so the believers were called,
probably because of their taking the direct way that leads to heaven. And why
did he not receive authority to have them punished there, but brings them to
Jerusalem! He did these things here with more authority. And mark on what a
peril he casts himself. He was not afraid lest he should take any harm, but (yet)
he took others also with him, "that if," it says, "he found any of this way, whether
they were men or women"— Oh, the ruthlessness!— "he might bring them
bound." By this journey of his, he wished to show them all (how he would act):