FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.5.

natural for all the forces in man to be moved by the instinct of God,
as by a superior power. Therefore whatever powers in man can be
the principles of human actions, can also be the subjects of gifts,
even as they are virtues; and such powers are the reason and
appetite.
Now the reason is speculative and practical: and in both we find the
apprehension of truth (which pertains to the discovery of truth), and
judgment concerning the truth. Accordingly, for the apprehension of
truth, the speculative reason is perfected by "understanding"; the
practical reason, by "counsel." In order to judge aright, the
speculative reason is perfected by "wisdom"; the practical reason by
"knowledge." The appetitive power, in matters touching a man's
relations to another, is perfected by "piety"; in matters touching
himself, it is perfected by "fortitude" against the fear of dangers; and
against inordinate lust for pleasures, by "fear," according to Prov.
15:27: "By the fear of the Lord every one declineth from evil," and
Ps. 118:120: "Pierce Thou my flesh with Thy fear: for I am afraid of
Thy judgments." Hence it is clear that these gifts extend to all those
things to which the virtues, both intellectual and moral, extend.
Reply to Objection 1: The gifts of the Holy Ghost perfect man in
matters concerning a good life: whereas art is not directed to such
matters, but to external things that can be made, since art is the right
reason, not about things to be done, but about things to be made
(Ethic. vi, 4). However, we may say that, as regards the infusion of
the gifts, the art is on the part of the Holy Ghost, Who is the principal
mover, and not on the part of men, who are His organs when He
moves them. The gift of fear corresponds, in a manner, to
temperance: for just as it belongs to temperance, properly speaking,
to restrain man from evil pleasures for the sake of the good
appointed by reason, so does it belong to the gift of fear, to withdraw
man from evil pleasures through fear of God.
Reply to Objection 2: Justice is so called from the rectitude of the
reason, and so it is more suitably called a virtue than a gift. But the
name of piety denotes the reverence which we give to our father and
to our country. And since God is the Father of all, the worship of God
is also called piety, as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei x, 1). Therefore
the gift whereby a man, through reverence for God, works good to
all, is fittingly called piety.
Reply to Objection 3: The mind of man is not moved by the Holy

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.5.

Ghost, unless in some way it be united to Him: even as the
instrument is not moved by the craftsman, unless there by contact or
some other kind of union between them. Now the primal union of
man with God is by faith, hope and charity: and, consequently, these
virtues are presupposed to the gifts, as being their roots. Therefore
all the gifts correspond to these three virtues, as being derived
therefrom.
Reply to Objection 4: Love, hope and joy have good for their object.
Now God is the Sovereign Good: wherefore the names of these
passions are transferred to the theological virtues which unite man
to God. On the other hand, the object of fear is evil, which can
nowise apply to God: hence fear does not denote union with God,
but withdrawal from certain things through reverence for God. Hence
it does not give its name to a theological virtue, but to a gift, which
withdraws us from evil, for higher motives than moral virtue does.
Reply to Objection 5: Wisdom directs both the intellect and the
affections of man. Hence two gifts are set down as corresponding to
wisdom as their directing principle; on the part of the intellect, the
gift of understanding; on the part of the affections, the gift of fear.
Because the principal reason for fearing God is taken from a
consideration of the Divine excellence, which wisdom considers.