believer, he is straightway justified. The intention then of the Law it did
establish, and what all its enactments aim after, this has it brought to a
consummation. Consequently it has not disannulled, but perfected it. Here then
three points he has demonstrated; first, that without the Law it is possible to be
justified; next, that this the Law could not effect; and, that faith is not opposed to
the Law. For since the chief cause of perplexity to the Jews was this, that the
faith seemed to be in opposition to it, he shows more than the Jew wishes, that so
far from being contrary, it is even in close alliance and coöperation with it,
which was what they especially longed to hear proved.
But since after this grace, whereby we were justified, there is need also of a
life suited to it, let us show an earnestness worthy the gift. And show it we shall,
if we keep with earnestness charity, the mother of good deeds. Now charity is
not bare words, or mere ways of speaking ([προσρήσεις]) to men, but a taking
care ([προστασία]) of them, and a putting forth of itself by works, as, for
instance, by relieving poverty, lending one's aid to the sick, rescuing from
dangers, to stand by them that be in difficulties, to weep with them that weep,
and to rejoice with them that rejoice. [Romans 12:15] For even this last is a part
of charity. And yet this seems a little thing, to be rejoicing with them that rejoice:
nevertheless it is exceedingly great, and requires for it the spirit of true wisdom.
And we may find many that perform the more irksome part ([πεικρότερον]), and
yet want vigor for this. For many weep with them that weep, but still do not
rejoice with them that rejoice, but are in tears when others rejoice; now this
comes of grudging and envy. The good deed then of rejoicing when our brother
rejoices is no small one, but even greater than the other: and haply not only
greater than weeping with them that weep, but even than standing by them that
are in danger. There are many, at all events, that have shared danger with men in
danger, but were cut to the heart when they came into honor. So great is the
tyranny of a grudging spirit! And yet the one is a thing of toils and labors, and
this of choice and temper only. Yet at the same time many that have endured the
harder task have not accomplished the one easier than it, but pine and consume

away when they see others in honor, when a whole Church is benefited, by
doctrine, or in any other fashion. And what can be worse than this? For such an
one does not any more fight with his brother, but with the will of God. Now
consider this, and be rid of the disease: and even if you be unwilling to set your
neighbor free, at least set yourself free from these countless evils. Why do you
carry war into your own thoughts? Why fill your soul with trouble? Why work
up a storm? Why turn things upside down? How will you be able, in this state of
mind, to ask forgiveness of sins? For if those that allow not the things done
against themselves to pass, neither does He forgive, what forgiveness shall He
grant to those who go about to injure those that have done them no injury? For
this is a proof of the utmost wickedness. Men of this kind are fighting with the
Devil, against the Church, and haply even worse than he. For him one can be on
one's guard against. But these cloaking themselves under the mask of
friendliness, secretly kindle the pile, throwing themselves the first into the
furnace, and laboring under a disease not only unfit for pity, but even such as to
meet with much ridicule. For why is it, tell me, that you are pale and trembling
and standing in fear? What evil has happened? Is it that your brother is in honor,
and looked up to, and in esteem? Why, you ought to make chaplets, and rejoice,
and glorify God, that your own member is in honor and looked up to! But are
you pained that God is glorified? Do you see to what issue the war tends? But,
some will say, it is not because God is glorified, but because my brother is. Yet
through him the glory ascends up to God: and so will the war from you do also.
But it is not this, he will say, that grieves me, for I should wish God to be
glorified by me. Well then! rejoice at your brother's being in honor, and then
glorified is God again through you also; and all will say, Blessed be God that has
His household so minded, wholly freed from envy, and rejoicing together at one
another's goods! And why do I speak of your brother? For if he were your foe
and enemy, and God were glorified through him, a friend should you make of
him for this reason. But you make your friend an enemy because God is glorified
by his being in honor. And were any one to heal your body when in evil plight,