but calculate the profit. Your people yonder cultivate your field: cultivate thou
their souls: they bring to you your fruits, raise thou them to heaven. He that
makes the beginning is the cause of all the rest: and you will be the cause that
the people are brought under Christian teaching ([κατηχουμένων]) both there,
and in the neighboring estates. Your baths do but make the peasants less hardy,
your taverns give them a taste for luxury, and yet you provide these for credit's
sake. Your markets and fairs, ([πανηγύρεις]) on the other hand, promote
covetousness. But think now what a thing it would be to see a presbyter, the
moving picture of Abraham, gray-headed, girded up, digging and working with
his own hands? What more pleasant than such a field! Their virtue thrives. No
intemperance there, nay, it is driven away: no drunkenness and wantonness, nay,
it is cast out: no vanity, nay, it is extinguished. All benevolent tempers shine out
the brighter through the simplicity of manners. How pleasant to go forth and
enter into the House of God, and to know that one built it himself: to fling
himself on his back in his litter, and after the bodily benefit of his pleasant
airing, be present both at the evening and the morning hymns, have the priest as
a guest at his table, in associating with him enjoy his benediction, see others also
coming there! This is a wall for his field, this its security. This is the field of
which it is said, "The smell of a full field which the Lord has blessed." [Genesis
27:27] If, even without this, the country is pleasant, because it is so quiet, so free
from distraction of business, what will it not be when this is added to it? The
country with a Church is like the Paradise of God. No clamor there, no turmoil,
no enemies at variance, no heresies: there you shall see all friends, holding the
same doctrines in common. The very quiet shall lead you to higher views, and
receiving you thus prepared by philosophy, the presbyter shall give you an
excellent cure. For here, whatever we may speak, the noise of the market drives
it all out: but there, what you shall hear, you will keep fixed in your mind. You
will be quite another man in the country through him: and moreover to the
people there he will be director, he will watch over them both by his presence
and by his influence in forming their manners. And what, I ask, would be the

cost? Make for a beginning a small house ([ἐ] [ν τάξει ναοὕ]) to serve as temple.
Your successor will build a porch, his successor will make other additions, and
the whole shall be put to your account. You give little, and receive the reward for
the whole. At any rate, make a beginning: lay a foundation. Exhort one another,
vie one with another in this matter. But now, where there is straw and grain and
such like to be stored, you make no difficulty of building: but for a place where
the fruits of souls may be gathered in, we bestow not a thought; and the people
are forced to go miles and miles, and to make long journeys, that they may get to
Church! Think, how good it is, when with all quietness the priest presents
himself in the Church, that he may draw near unto God, and say prayers for the
village, day by day, and for its owner! Say, is it a small matter, that even in the
Holy Oblations evermore your name is included in the prayers, and that for the
village day by day prayers are made unto God?— How greatly this profits you
for all else! It chances that certain (great) persons dwell in the neighborhood, and
have overseers: now to you, being poor, one of them will not deign even to pay a
visit: but the presbyter, it is likely, he will invite, and make him sit at his table.
How much good results from this! The village will in the first place be free from
all evil suspicion. None will charge it with murder, with theft: none will suspect
anything of the kind.— They have also another comfort, if sickness befall, if
death.— Then again the friendships formed there by people as they go side by
side (to and from the Church) are not struck up at random and promiscuously:
and the meetings there are far more pleasant than those which take place in marts
and fairs. The people themselves also will be more respectable, because of their
presbyter. How is it you hear that Jerusalem was had in honor in the old times
above all other cities? Why was this? Because of the then prevailing religion.
Therefore it is that where God is honored, there is nothing evil: as, on the
contrary, where He is not honored, there is nothing good. It will be great security
both with God and with men. Only, I beseech you, that you be not remiss: only
may you put your hand to this work. For if he who brings out "the precious from
the vile," shall be "as the mouth of God" [Jeremiah 15:19]; he who benefits and