SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.3.

it become known, is a tacit precept, and a man's obedience seems to
be all the more prompt, forasmuch as by obeying he forestalls the
express command as soon as he understands his superior's will.
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing prevents the one same material object
from admitting two special aspects to which two special virtues
correspond: thus a soldier, by defending his king's fortress, fulfils
both an act of fortitude, by facing the danger of death for a good end,
and an act of justice, by rendering due service to his lord.
Accordingly the aspect of precept, which obedience considers,
occurs in acts of all virtues, but not in all acts of virtue, since not all
acts of virtue are a matter of precept, as stated above (FS, Question
96, Article 3). Moreover, certain things are sometimes a matter of
precept, and pertain to no other virtue, such things for instance as
are not evil except because they are forbidden. Wherefore, if
obedience be taken in its proper sense, as considering formally and
intentionally the aspect of precept, it will be a special virtue, and
disobedience a special sin: because in this way it is requisite for
obedience that one perform an act of justice or of some other virtue
with the intention of fulfilling a precept; and for disobedience that
one treat the precept with actual contempt. On the other hand, if
obedience be taken in a wide sense for the performance of any
action that may be a matter of precept, and disobedience for the
omission of that action through any intention whatever, then
obedience will be a general virtue, and disobedience a general sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Obedience is not a theological virtue, for its
direct object is not God, but the precept of any superior, whether
expressed or inferred, namely, a simple word of the superior,
indicating his will, and which the obedient subject obeys promptly,
according to Titus 3:1, "Admonish them to be subject to princes, and
to obey at a word," etc.
It is, however, a moral virtue, since it is a part of justice, and it
observes the mean between excess and deficiency. Excess thereof
is measured in respect, not of quantity, but of other circumstances,
in so far as a man obeys either whom he ought not, or in matters
wherein he ought not to obey, as we have stated above regarding
religion (Question 92, Article 2). We may also reply that as in justice,
excess is in the person who retains another's property, and
deficiency in the person who does not receive his due, according to
the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 4), so too obedience observes the mean
between excess on the part of him who fails to pay due obedience to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.3.

his superior, since he exceeds in fulfilling his own will, and
deficiency on the part of the superior, who does not receive
obedience. Wherefore in this way obedience will be a mean between
two forms of wickedness, as was stated above concerning justice
(Question 58, Article 10).
Reply to Objection 3: Obedience, like every virtue requires the will to
be prompt towards its proper object, but not towards that which is
repugnant to it. Now the proper object of obedience is a precept, and
this proceeds from another's will. Wherefore obedience make a
man's will prompt in fulfilling the will of another, the maker, namely,
of the precept. If that which is prescribed to him is willed by him for
its own sake apart from its being prescribed, as happens in
agreeable matters, he tends towards it at once by his own will and
seems to comply, not on account of the precept, but on account of
his own will. But if that which is prescribed is nowise willed for its
own sake, but, considered in itself, repugnant to his own will, as
happens in disagreeable matters, then it is quite evident that it is not
fulfilled except on account of the precept. Hence Gregory says
(Moral. xxxv) that "obedience perishes or diminishes when it holds
its own in agreeable matters," because, to wit, one's own will seems
to tend principally, not to the accomplishment of the precept, but to
the fulfilment of one's own desire; but that "it increases in
disagreeable or difficult matters," because there one's own will tends
to nothing beside the precept. Yet this must be understood as
regards outward appearances: for, on the other hand, according to
the judgment of God, Who searches the heart, it may happen that
even in agreeable matters obedience, while holding its own, is
nonetheless praiseworthy, provided the will of him that obeys tend
no less devotedly [Question 82, Article 2] to the fulfilment of the
precept.
Reply to Objection 4: Reverence regards directly the person that
excels: wherefore it admits a various species according to the
various aspects of excellence. Obedience, on the other hand,
regards the precept of the person that excels, and therefore admits
of only one aspect. And since obedience is due to a person's precept
on account of reverence to him, it follows that obedience to a man is
of one species, though the causes from which it proceeds differ
specifically.