when they are going to be brought before the judgment-seat, and are thinking
over all the things they have done, and therefore are fearful and trembling.
They, however, were not such, but pressed on. And Paul even groaned;
"And we" (he says) "that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened." [2
Corinthians 5:4] Such were they who were with Abraham; "strangers," he says,
they were in respect of the whole world, and "they sought a country."
What sort of "country" was this? Was it that which they had left? By no
means. For what hindered them if they wished, from returning again, and
becoming citizens? But they sought that which is in Heaven? Thus they desired
their departure hence, and so they pleased God; for "God was not ashamed to be
called their God."
6. Ah! How great a dignity! He vouch-safed "to be called their God." What
do you say? He is called the God of the earth, and the God of Heaven, and have
you set it down as a great thing that "He is not ashamed to be called their God"?
Great and truly great this is, and a proof of exceeding blessedness. How?
Because He is called God of earth and of heaven as also of the Gentiles: in that
He created and formed them: but [God] of those holy men, not in this sense, but
as some true friend.
And I will make it plain to you by an example; as in the case of [slaves] in
large households, when any of those placed over the household are very highly
esteemed, and manage everything themselves, and can use great freedom
towards their masters, the Master is called after them, and one may find many so
called. But what do I say? As we might say the God, not of the Gentiles but of
the world, so we might say "the God of Abraham." But you do not know how
great a dignity this is, because we do not attain to it. For as now He is called the
Lord of all Christians, and yet the name goes beyond our deserts: consider the
greatness if He were called the God of one [person]! He who is called the God of
the whole world is "not ashamed to be called" the God of three men: and with
good reason: for the saints would turn the scale, I do not say against the world
but against ten thousand such. "For one man who does the will of the Lord, is

better than ten thousand transgressors." [Sirach 16:3]
Now that they called themselves "strangers" in this sense is manifest. But
supposing that they said they were "strangers" on account of the strange land,
why did David also [call himself a stranger]? Was not he a king? Was not he a
prophet? Did he not spend his life in his own country? Why then does he say, "I
am a stranger and a sojourner"? [Psalm 39:12] How are you a stranger? "As"
(he says) "all my fathers were." Do you see that they too were strangers? We
have a country, he means, but not really our country. But how art you yourself a
stranger? As to the earth. Therefore they also [were strangers] in respect of the
earth: For "as they were," he says, so also am I; and as he, so they too.
7. Let us even now become strangers; that God may "not be ashamed of us
to be called our God." For it is a shame to Him, when He is called the God of the
wicked, and He also is ashamed of them; as He is glorified when He is [called
the God] of the good and the kind, and of them that cultivate virtue. For if "we"
decline to be called the masters of our wicked slaves, and give them up; and
should any one come to us and say, 'such a one does innumerable bad things, he
is your slave, is he not?' We immediately say, "by no means," to get rid of the
disgrace: for a slave has a close relation to his master, and the discredit passes
from the one to the other. — But they were so illustrious, so full of confidence,
that not only was He "not ashamed to be called" from them, but He even
Himself says, "I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob." [Exodus 3:6]
Let us also, my beloved, become "strangers"; that God may "not be
ashamed of us"; that He may not be ashamed, and deliver us up to Hell. Such
were they who said, "Lord, have we not prophesied in Your Name, and in Your
Name have done many wonderful works!" [Matthew 7:22] But see what Christ
says to them: "I know you not:" the very thing which masters would do, when
wicked slaves run to them, wishing to be rid of the disgrace. "I know you not,"
He says. How then dost Thou punish those whom You know not? I said, "I know
not," in a different sense: that is, "I deny you, and renounce you." But God forbid