but they were doubtful, and hesitating concerning it; and yet they repented with
all diligence. What reason then shall we have to urge, when those, who had no
ground for confidence as to the issue, are seen to have exhibited so great a
change; but thou who hast ground of confidence in the mercy of God, and who
hast frequently received many pledges of His care, and hast heard prophets, and
apostles, and hast been instructed by actual events; hast yet no emulation to
reach the same measure of virtue as these did! Great assuredly was their virtue!
But greater by far was the mercy of God! And this may be seen from the very
greatness of the threat. For this reason God did not add to the declaration, "But if
you repent. I will spare:" in order that by setting forth a sentence without
limitation, He might increase the fear and having increased the fear, He might
constrain them more speedily to repentance.
18. The prophet is indeed ashamed, foreseeing what the issue would be, and
conjecturing that what he had prophesied, would remain unaccomplished; God
however is not ashamed, but is desirous of one thing only, viz. the salvation of
men, and corrects His own servant. For when he had entered the ship, He
straightway there raised a boisterous sea; in order that you might know that
where sin is, there is a tempest; where there is disobedience, there is the swelling
of the waves. The city was shaken because of the sins of the Ninevites; and the
ship was shaken because of the disobedience of the prophet. The sailors
therefore threw Jonah in the deep, and the ship was preserved. Let us then drown
our sins, and our city will assuredly be safe! Flight will certainly be no
advantage to us; for it did not profit him; on the contrary, it did him injury. He
fled from the land indeed, but he fled not from the wrath of God; he fled from
the land, but he brought the tempest after him on the sea; and so far was he from
obtaining any benefit by his flight, that he plunged those also who received him
into the extremest peril. And while he sat sailing in the ship, although the sailors,
the pilots, and all the necessary apparatus of the ship were there present, he was
placed in the utmost danger. After, however, having been thrown out into the
deep, and having put away his sin by means of the punishment, he had been

conveyed into that unstable vessel, I mean, the whale's belly, he enjoyed great
security. This was for the purpose of teaching you, that as no ship can be of any
use to him who is living in sin, so him who has put away his sin, the sea cannot
drown, nor monsters destroy. Of a truth, the waves received, but they did not
suffocate him. The whale received him, but did not destroy him; but both the
animal and the element gave back to God unhurt that, with which they were
entrusted; and by all these things the prophet was taught to be humane and
merciful; and not to be more cruel than wild beasts, or thoughtless sailors, or
unruly waves. For even the sailors did not immediately at first give him up, but
after much compulsion; and the sea and the monster guarded him with great
kindness; all these things being under God's direction.
19. Therefore he came back again; he preached; he threatened; he
persuaded; he preserved; he affrighted; he amended; he established; by one, and
that the first preaching! Many days he needed not, nor continued counsel; but
speaking these simple words only, he brought all to repentance! On this account
God did not lead him directly from the ship into the city; but the sailors
committed him to the sea; the sea to the whale; the whale to God; God to the
Ninevites; and by this long circuit he brought back the fugitive, that he might
instruct all, that it is impossible to fly from the hands of God; that wherever any
one may roam, dragging his sin after him, he will have to undergo a thousand
evils; and though no mortal were present, yet on every side the whole creation
will rise up against him with the utmost vehemence! Let us not then provide for
our safety by flight, but by a change of the moral character. Is it for remaining in
the city that God is angry with you, that you should fly? It is because you have
sinned, that He is indignant. Lay aside therefore the sin, and where the cause of
your wound lies, thence remove the fountain of the evil. For the physicians too
give us directions to cure contraries by contraries. Is fever, for instance,
produced by a full diet? They subject the disease to the regimen of abstinence.
Does any one fall sick from sadness? They say that mirth is the suitable
medicine for it. Thus also it befits us to act with respect to diseases of the soul.