so also he who is resentful, and retains an enemy, will never have the enjoyment
of any peace; incessantly raging, as he does, and daily increasing the tempest of
his thoughts calling to mind his words and acts, and detesting the very name of
him who has aggrieved him. Do you but mention his enemy, he becomes furious
at once, and sustains much inward anguish; and should he chance to get only a
bare sight of him, he fears and trembles, as if encountering the worst evils. Yea,
if he perceives any of his relations, if but his garment, or his dwelling, or street,
he is tormented by the sight of them. For as in the case of those who are beloved,
their faces, their garments, their sandals, their houses, or streets, excite us, the
instant we behold them; so also should we observe a servant, or friend, or house,
or street, or any thing else belonging to those we hate and hold our enemies, we
are stung by all these things; and the strokes we endure from the sight of each
one of them are frequent and continual.
7. What is the need then of sustaining such a siege, such torment and such
punishment? For if hell did not threaten the resentful; yet for the very torment
resulting from the thing itself we ought to forgive the offenses of those who have
aggrieved us. But when deathless punishments remain behind, what can be more
senseless than the man, who both here and there brings punishment upon
himself, while he thinks to be revenged upon his enemy! For suppose that we see
him still prosperous, then we are ready to die of chagrin; but if in an adverse
condition, we are in fear, lest some propitious turn of events should take place.
But for both of these there is stored up for us an inevitable punishment. For,
"Rejoice not," he says, "when your enemy stumbles." [Proverbs 24:17] And tell
me not of the greatness of the injuries received; for it is not this which makes
your wrath to be retained; but this, that you are unmindful of your own offenses;
that you have not before your eyes either hell or the fear of God! To convince
you that this is true, I will endeavour to make it manifest from the events which
have happened in this city. For when the persons impeached of those flagrant
crimes were dragged to the tribunal of justice—when the fire was kindled
within, and the executioners stood around, and were lacerating their ribs, if any

one standing beside them had proclaimed, "If you have any enemies, dismiss
your resentment, and we shall be able to set you free from this punishment;"—
would they not have kissed their very feet? And why do I say their feet? If one
had bidden them take them for their masters, they would not then have refused.
But if punishment that is human, and has its bounds, would have triumphed over
all anger, much more would the punishment to come, if it had continual
possession of our thoughts, expel from the soul not only resentment, but every
evil imagination? For what is easier, I ask, than to get rid of resentment against
the injurer? Is there any long journey to be undertaken? Is there any expenditure
of money? Is the aid of others to be invoked? It suffices only to resolve, and the
good deed at once reaches the goal. What punishment, then, must we not
deserve, if on account of worldly affairs we stoop to slavish occupations; and
show a servility unworthy of ourselves; and expend money; and enter into
conversation with porters, that we may flatter impious men; and do and say all
manner of things, so that we may perfectly attain the end we have in view; and
yet cannot endure, for the sake of God's laws, to entreat a brother who has
injured us, but consider it a disgrace to be the first to make advances. Are you
ashamed, tell me, when you are going to be the first to make gain? Rather, on the
contrary, you ought to be ashamed of persisting in this passion; and waiting until
the person who has committed the injury comes to you to be reconciled; for this
is a disgrace, and a reproach, and the greatest loss.
8. For he who comes the first it is, who reaps all the fruit; and when at the
entreaty of another you lay aside your anger, the good work is to be accounted
his; for you have discharged the law as doing a favour to him, not as obeying
God. But if, when no one entreats, when not even the man who has done the
injury approaches, or solicits you, you yourself dismissing from your thoughts
all shame, and all delay, runnest forward freely to the injurer, and dost quell
anger entirely, the good deed becomes wholly your own, and you shall receive
all the reward. If I say, "Practise fasting," your plea, perchance, is bodily
weakness. If I say, "Give to the poor," it is poverty, and bringing up children. If I