Reply to Objection 1: Holy Writ is proposed to all alike: and so, the
form of Baptism, which can be conferred by all, should be expressed
in Holy Writ, as also the form of the Eucharist, which in regard to that
sacrament, expresses faith which is necessary for salvation. Now the
forms of the other sacraments are not contained in Holy Writ, but
were handed down to the Church by the apostles, who received them
from our Lord, as the Apostle declares (1 Cor. 11:23): "For I have
received of the Lord that which also I delivered to you," etc.
Reply to Objection 2: The words which are essential to the form, viz.
the prayer of deprecation, are said by all; but other words which
pertain to the well-being thereof, are not said by all.
Reply to Objection 3: The matter of Baptism has a certain
sanctification of its own from the very contact of our Saviour's flesh;
but the form of words sanctifies it so that it has a sanctifying force.
In like manner when the matter of this sacrament has been sanctified
in itself, it requires sanctification in its use, so that it may sanctify
actually.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the form of this sacrament should be

expressed by way of assertion or of petition?
Objection 1: It would seem that the form of this sacrament should be
expressed by way of assertion rather than of petition. Because all
the sacraments of the New Law have a sure effect. But sureness of
effect is not expressed in the sacramental forms except by way of
assertion, as when we say: "This is My body" or "I baptize thee."
Therefore the form of this sacrament should be expressed as an
assertion.
Objection 2: Further, the intention of the minister should be
expressed in the sacramental forms because it is essential to the
sacrament. But the intention of conferring a sacrament is not
expressed except by an assertion. Therefore, etc.
Objection 3: Further, in some churches the following words are said
in the conferring of this sacrament: "I anoint these eyes with
consecrated oil in the name of the Father," etc., which is in keeping
with the forms of the other sacraments. Therefore it seems that such
is the form of this sacrament.
On the contrary, The form of a sacrament must needs be one that is
observed everywhere. Now the words employed according to the
custom of all the churches are not those quoted above, but take the
form of a petition viz.: "Through this holy unction, and His most
tender mercy, may the Lord pardon thee whatever sins thou hast
committed, by sight," etc. Therefore the form of this sacrament is
expressed as a petition.
Further, this seems to follow from the words of James, who ascribes
the effect of this sacrament to prayer: "The prayer of faith," says he
(5:15), "shall save the sick man." Since then a sacrament takes its
efficacy from its form, it seems that the form of this sacrament is
expressed as a petition.
I answer that, The form of this sacrament is expressed by way of a
petition, as appears from the words of James, and from the custom
of the Roman Church, who uses no other than words of supplication
in conferring this sacrament. Several reasons are assigned for this:
first, because the recipient of this sacrament is deprived of his