wish is to be supported by you. For I love you exceedingly, and so desire to eat
at your table, which is the way with those that love a person. And I glory [John
15:8] in this. And when the whole world are spectators, then am I to herald you
forth, and in the hearing of all men to display you as My supporter. Yet we, when
we are supported by any one, feel ashamed, and cover our faces; but He, as
loving us exceedingly, even if we hold our peace, will then tell out what we did
with much praise, and is not ashamed to say, that when Himself was naked we
clothed Him, and fed Him when hungry. Let us then lay all these things to heart,
and not be contented with passing mere praises upon them, but let us even
accomplish what I have been speaking of. For what is the good of these
applauses and clamors? I demand one thing only of you, and that is the display
of them in real action, the obedience of deeds. This is my praise, this your gain,
this gives me more lustre than a diadem. When you have left the Church then,
this is the crown that you should make for me and for you, through the hand of
the poor; that both in the present life we may be nourished with a goodly hope,
and after we have departed to the life to come, we may attain to those good
things without number, to which may all of us attain by the grace and love
toward man, etc.

## Homily 16 on Romans

Rom. IX. 1
"I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness
in the Holy Ghost."
Did I not seem yesterday to you to have spoken some great and exorbitant
things of Paul's love toward Christ? And great indeed they were, too great for
any words to express. Yet what you have heard today are as far above those
things, as those things were above ours. And yet I did not think they could be
exceeded, still when I came to what has been read today it did appear far more
glorious than the whole of the former. And that he was aware of this himself he
shows by his exordium. For as on the point of entering upon greater things than
those, and therefore liable to be disbelieved by the generality, he first uses a
strong asseveration about the matter he is going to speak of; which many are in
the habit of doing when they are going to say somewhat which is not believed by
the generality, and about which they feel the utmost certainty in their own minds.
Hence he says, "I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, and my conscience bears
witness,"
Ver. 2, 3. "That I have a great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart.
For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ."
What do you say, O Paul? From Christ, your beloved One, from Whom
neither kingdom nor hell, nor things visible nor intelligible, nor another world as
great, would separate you, is it from Him that you would now be accursed? What
has happened? Have you changed, have you given over that love? No, he replies,
fear not. Rather I have even made it more intense. How then is it that you would
fain be accursed, and seekest a separation, and a removal to such a distance, that
after it there is no possibility of finding a more distant one? Because I love Him
exceedingly, he may reply. How, pray, and in what manner? For the things seem