SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.3.

will is able to resist the passion, it falls short of the true nature of
rapture, unless perchance the passion be so strong that it takes
away entirely the use of reason, as happens to those who are mad
with anger or love.
It must be observed. however, that both these excesses affecting the
appetite may cause an excess in the cognitive power, either because
the mind is carried away to certain intelligible objects, through being
drawn away from objects of sense, or because it is caught up into
some imaginary vision or fanciful apparition.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as love is a movement of the appetite with
regard to good, so fear is a movement of the appetite with regard to
evil. Wherefore either of them may equally cause an aberration of
mind; and all the more since fear arises from love, as Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei xiv, 7,9).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Paul, when in rapture, saw the essence

of God?
Objection 1: It would seem that Paul, when in rapture, did not see the
essence of God. For just as we read of Paul that he was rapt to the
third heaven, so we read of Peter (Acts 10:10) that "there came upon
him an ecstasy of mind." Now Peter, in his ecstasy, saw not God's
essence but an imaginary vision. Therefore it would seem that
neither did Paul see the essence of God.
Objection 2: Further, the vision of God is beatific. But Paul, in his
rapture, was not beatified; else he would never have returned to the
unhappiness of this life, but his body would have been glorified by
the overflow from his soul, as will happen to the saints after the
resurrection, and this clearly was not the case. Therefore Paul when
in rapture saw not the essence of God.
Objection 3: Further, according to 1 Cor. 13:10-12, faith and hope are
incompatible with the vision of the Divine essence. But Paul when in
this state had faith and hope. Therefore he saw not the essence of
God.
Objection 4: Further, as Augustine states (Gen. ad lit. xii, 6,7),
"pictures of bodies are seen in the imaginary vision." Now Paul is
stated (2 Cor. 12:2,4) to have seen certain pictures in his rapture, for
instance of the "third heaven" and of "paradise." Therefore he would
seem to have been rapt to an imaginary vision rather than to the
vision of the Divine essence.
On the contrary, Augustine (Ep. CXLVII, 13; ad Paulin., de videndo
Deum) concludes that "possibly God's very substance was seen by
some while yet in this life: for instance by Moses, and by Paul who in
rapture heard unspeakable words, which it is not granted unto man
to utter."
I answer that, Some have said that Paul, when in rapture, saw "not
the very essence of God, but a certain reflection of His clarity." But
Augustine clearly comes to an opposite decision, not only in his
book (De videndo Deum), but also in Gen. ad lit. xii, 28 (quoted in a
gloss on 2 Cor. 12:2). Indeed the words themselves of the Apostle
indicate this. For he says that "he heard secret words, which it is not