THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.2.

before had come to be judged."
Reply to Objection 1: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv): "We do
not speak of the Father's right hand as of a place, for how can a
place be designated by His right hand, who Himself is beyond all
place? Right and left belong to things definable by limit. But we
style, as the Father's right hand, the glory and honor of the
Godhead."
Reply to Objection 2: The argument holds good if sitting at the right
hand be taken corporeally. Hence Augustine says (De Symb. i): "If
we accept it in a carnal sense that Christ sits at the Father's right
hand, then the Father will be on the left. But there"---that is, in eternal
bliss, "it is all right hand, since no misery is there."
Reply to Objection 3: As Gregory says in a Homily on the Ascension
(Hom. xxix in Evang.), "it is the judge's place to sit, while to stand is
the place of the combatant or helper. Consequently, Stephen in his
toil of combat saw Him standing whom He had as his helper. But
Mark describes Him as seated after the Ascension, because after the
glory of His Ascension He will at the end be seen as judge."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it belongs to Christ as God to sit at the

right hand of the Father?
Objection 1: It would seem that it does not belong to Christ as God to
sit at the right hand of the Father. For, as God, Christ is the Father's
right hand. But it does not appear to be the same thing to be the right
hand of anyone and to sit on his right hand. Therefore, as God,
Christ does not sit at the right hand of the Father.
Objection 2: Further, in the last chapter of Mark (16:19) it is said that
"the Lord Jesus was taken up into heaven, and sitteth on the right
hand of God." But it was not as God that Christ was taken up to
heaven. Therefore neither does He, as God, sit at the right hand of
God.
Objection 3: Further, Christ as God is the equal of the Father and of
the Holy Ghost. Consequently, if Christ sits as God at the right hand
of the Father, with equal reason the Holy Ghost sits at the right hand
of the Father and of the Son, and the Father Himself on the right
hand of the Son; which no one is found to say.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv): that "what we
style as the Father's right hand, is the glory and honor of the
Godhead, wherein the Son of God existed before ages as God and as
consubstantial with the Father."
I answer that, As may be gathered from what has been said (Article
1) three things can be understood under the expression "right hand."
First of all, as Damascene takes it, "the glory of the Godhead":
secondly, according to Augustine "the beatitude of the Father":
thirdly, according to the same authority, "judiciary power." Now as
we observed (Article 1) "sitting denotes" either abiding, or royal or
judiciary dignity. Hence, to sit on the right hand of the Father is
nothing else than to share in the glory of the Godhead with the
Father, and to possess beatitude and judiciary power, and that
unchangeably and royally. But this belongs to the Son as God.
Hence it is manifest that Christ as God sits at the right hand of the
Father; yet so that this preposition "at," which is a transitive one,
implies merely personal distinction and order of origin, but not
degree of nature or dignity, for there is no such thing in the Divine
Persons, as was shown in the FP, Question 42, Articles 3,4.