opinion. Because, since none can live without some sensible and
bodily pleasure, if they who teach that all pleasures are evil, are
found in the act of taking pleasure; men will be more inclined to
pleasure by following the example of their works instead of listening
to the doctrine of their words: since, in human actions and passions,
wherein experience is of great weight, example moves more than
words.
We must therefore say that some pleasures are good, and that some
are evil. For pleasure is a repose of the appetitive power in some
loved good, and resulting from some operation; wherefore we assign
a twofold reason for this assertion. The first is in respect of the good
in which a man reposes with pleasure. For good and evil in the moral
order depend on agreement or disagreement with reason, as stated
above (Question 18, Article 5): just as in the order of nature, a thing
is said to be natural, if it agrees with nature, and unnatural, if it
disagrees. Accordingly, just as in the natural order there is a certain
natural repose, whereby a thing rests in that which agrees with its
nature, for instance, when a heavy body rests down below; and
again an unnatural repose, whereby a thing rests in that which
disagrees with its nature, as when a heavy body rests up aloft: so, in
the moral order, there is a good pleasure, whereby the higher or
lower appetite rests in that which is in accord with reason; and an
evil pleasure, whereby the appetite rests in that which is discordant
from reason and the law of God.
The second reason can be found by considering the actions, some
of which are good, some evil. Now pleasures which are conjoined to
actions are more akin to those actions, than desires, which precede
them in point of time. Wherefore, since the desires of good actions
are good, and of evil actions, evil; much more are the pleasures of
good actions good, and those of evil actions evil.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 33, Article 3), it is
not the pleasures which result from an act of reason, that hinder the
reason or destroy prudence, but extraneous pleasures, such as the
pleasures of the body. These indeed hinder the use of reason, as
stated above (Question 33, Article 3), either by contrariety of the
appetite that rests in something repugnant to reason, which makes
the pleasure morally bad; or by fettering the reason: thus in conjugal
intercourse, though the pleasure be in accord with reason, yet it
hinders the use of reason, on account of the accompanying bodily
change. But in this case the pleasure is not morally evil; as neither is

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.34, C.2.

sleep, whereby the reason is fettered, morally evil, if it be taken
according to reason: for reason itself demands that the use of
reason be interrupted at times. We must add, however, that although
this fettering of the reason through the pleasure of conjugal
intercourse has no moral malice, since it is neither a mortal nor a
venial sin; yet it proceeds from a kind of moral malice, namely, from
the sin of our first parent; because, as stated in the FP, Question 98,
Article 2. the case was different in the state of innocence.
Reply to Objection 2: The temperate man does not shun all
pleasures, but those that are immoderate, and contrary to reason.
The fact that children and dumb animals seek pleasures, does not
prove that all pleasures are evil: because they have from God their
natural appetite, which is moved to that which is naturally suitable to
them.
Reply to Objection 3: Art is not concerned with all kinds of good, but
with the making of external things, as we shall state further on
(Question 57, Article 3). But actions and passions, which are within
us, are more the concern of prudence and virtue than of art.
Nevertheless there is an art of making pleasure, namely, "the art of
cookery and the art of making arguments," as stated in Ethic. vii, 12.