Therefore it is that we are not delivered. Surely Abraham did not leave his home
expecting again to receive his son, but as prepared to sacrifice him; and it was
contrary to his expectation that he received him again safe. And thou, when you
fall into tribulation, be not in haste to be delivered, prepare your mind for all
endurance, and speedily you shall be delivered from your affliction. For God
brings it upon you for this end, that He may chasten you. When therefore from
the first we learn to bear it patiently, and do not sink into despair, He presently
relieves us, as having effected the whole matter.
I should like to tell you an instructive story, which has much of profit in it.
What then is it? Once, when a persecution arose, and a severe war was raging
against the Church, two men were apprehended. The one was ready to suffer
anything whatever; the other was prepared to submit with firmness to be
beheaded, but with fear and trembling shrunk from other tortures. Observe then
the dispensation towards these men. When the judge was seated, he ordered the
one who was ready to endure anything, to be beheaded. The other he caused to
be hung up and tortured, and that not once or twice, but from city to city. Now
why was this permitted? That he might recover through torments that quality of
mind which he had neglected, that he might shake off all cowardice, and be no
longer afraid to endure anything. Joseph too, when he was urgent to escape from
prison, was left to remain there. For hear him saying, "Indeed I was stolen away
out of the land of the Hebrews; but do thou make mention of me to the king."
[Genesis 40:14-15] And for this he was suffered to remain, that he might learn
not to place hope or confidence in men, but to cast all upon God. Knowing these
things therefore let us give thanks to God, and let us do all things that are
expedient for us, that we may obtain the good things to come, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, with whom to the Father be glory, with the Holy Ghost, now
and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Argument

First, it is necessary to state the argument of the Epistle, then also the
matters that are questioned respecting it. What then is the argument? Philemon
was a man of admirable and noble character. That he was an admirable man is
evident from the fact, that his whole household was of believers, and of such
believers as even to be called a Church: therefore he says in this Epistle, "And to
the Church that is in your house." [Philemon 2] He bears witness also to his
great obedience, and that "the bowels of the Saints are refreshed in him."
[Philemon 7] And he himself in this Epistle commanded him to prepare him a
lodging. [Philemon 22] It seems to me therefore that his house was altogether a
lodging for the Saints. This excellent man, then, had a certain slave named
Onesimus. This Onesimus, having stolen something from his master, had run
away. For that he had stolen, hear what he says: "If he has wronged you, or owes
you anything, I will repay you." (v. 18, 19.) Coming therefore to Paul at Rome,
and having found him in prison, and having enjoyed the benefit of his teaching,
he there also received Baptism. For that he obtained there the gift of Baptism is
manifest from his saying, "Whom I have begotten in my bonds." [Philemon 10]
Paul therefore writes, recommending him to his master, that on every account he
should forgive him, and receive him as one now regenerate.
But because some say, that it was superfluous that this Epistle should be
annexed, since he is making a request about a small matter in behalf of one man,
let them learn who make these objections, that they are themselves deserving of
very many censures. For it was not only proper that these small Epistles, in
behalf of things so necessary, should have been inscribed, but I wish that it were
possible to meet with one who could deliver to us the history of the Apostles, not
only all they wrote and spoke of, but of the rest of their conversation, even what
they ate, and when they ate, when they walked, and where they sat, what they