all.
How then says He, "Pray that you enter not into temptation."
[Matthew 26:41] For this cause he does not show you Jesus simply going up, but
"led up" according to the principle of the Economy; signifying obscurely by this,
that we ought not of ourselves to leap upon it, but being dragged thereto, to stand
manfully.
And see whither the Spirit led Him up, when He had taken Him; not into a
city and forum, but into a wilderness. That is, He being minded to attract the
devil, gives him a handle not only by His hunger, but also by the place. For then
most especially does the devil assail, when he sees men left alone, and by
themselves. Thus did he also set upon the woman in the beginning, having
caught her alone, and found her apart from her husband. Just as when he sees us
with others and banded together, he is not equally confident, and makes no
attack. Wherefore we have the greatest need on this very account to be flocking
together continually, that we may not be open to the devil's attacks.
2. Having then found Him in the wilderness, and in a pathless wilderness
(for that the wilderness was such, Mark has declared, saying, that He "was with
the wild beasts" [Mark 1:13]), behold with how much craft he draws near, and
wickedness; and for what sort of opportunity he watches. For not in his fast, but
in his hunger he approaches Him; to instruct you how great a good fasting is, and
how it is a most powerful shield against the devil, and that after the font, men
should give themselves up, not to luxury and drunkenness, and a full table, but to
fasting. For, for this cause even He fasted, not as needing it Himself, but to
instruct us. Thus, since our sins before the font were brought in by serving the
belly: much as if any one who had made a sick man whole were to forbid his
doing those things, from which the distemper arose; so we see here likewise that
He Himself after the font brought in fasting. For indeed both Adam by the
incontinence of the belly was cast out of paradise; and the flood in Noah's time,
this produced; and this brought down the thunders on Sodom. For although there
was also a charge of whoredom, nevertheless from this grew the root of each of

those punishments; which Ezekiel also signified when he said, "But this was the
iniquity of Sodom, that she waxed wanton in pride and in fullness of bread, and
in abundance of luxury." [Ezekiel 16:49] Thus the Jews also per petrated the
greatest wickedness, being driven upon transgression by their drunkenness and
delicacy. [Isaiah 5:11-12]
On this account then even He too fasts forty days, pointing out to us the
medicines of our salvation; yet proceeds no further, lest on the other hand,
through the exceeding greatness of the miracle the truth of His Economy should
be discredited. For as it is, this cannot be, seeing that both Moses and Elias,
anticipating Him, could advance to so great a length of time, strengthened by the
power of God. And if He had proceeded farther, from this among other things
His assumption of our flesh would have seemed incredible to many.
Having then fasted forty days and as many nights,
"He was afterwards an hungered; [Matthew 4:2] " affording him a point to
lay hold of and approach, that by actual conflict He might show how to prevail
and be victorious. Just so do wrestlers also: when teaching their pupils how to
prevail and overcome, they voluntarily in the lists engage with others, to afford
these in the persons of their antagonists the means of seeing and learning the
mode of conquest. Which same thing then also took place. For it being His will
to draw him on so far, He both made His hunger known to him, and awaited his
approach, and as He waited for him, so He dashed him to earth, once, twice, and
three times, with such ease as became Him.
3. But that we may not, by hurrying over these victories, mar your profit, let
us begin from the first assault, and examine each with exact care.
Thus, after He was an hungered, it is said, "The tempter came, and said
unto Him, If Thou be Son of God, command that these stones be made bread."
[Matthew 4:3]
For, because he had heard a voice borne from above, and saying, "This is
My beloved Son;" and had heard also John bearing so large witness concerning
Him, and after that saw Him an hungered; he was thenceforth in perplexity, and