Homily 45 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XX. 32
"And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of His grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified."
What he does when writing in an Epistle, this he does also when speaking
in council: from exhorting, he ends with prayer: for since he had much alarmed
them by saying, "Grievous wolves shall enter in among you" [Acts 20:29],
therefore, not to overpower them, and make them lose all self-possession,
observe the consolation (he gives). "And now," he says, as always, "I commend
you, brethren, to God, and to the word of His grace:" that is, to His grace: it is
grace that saves. He constantly puts them in mind of grace, to make them more
earnest as being debtors, and to persuade them to have confidence. "Which is
able to build you up." He does not say, to build, but, "to build up," showing that
they had (already) been built. Then he puts them in mind of the hope to come;
"to give you an inheritance," he says, "among all them which are sanctified."
Then exhortation again: "I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel."
[Acts 20:33] He takes away that which is the root of evils, the love of money.
"Silver, or gold," he says. He says not, I have not taken, but, not even "coveted."
No great thing this, but what follows after is great. "Yea, you yourselves know,
that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with
me. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, you ought to support the
weak." (v. 34, 35.) Observe him employed in work and not simply that, but
toiling. "These hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were
with me:" so as to put them to shame. And see how worthily of them. For he says
not, You ought to show yourselves superior to money, but what? "to support the
weak"— not all indiscriminately— "and to hear the word of the Lord which He

spoke, It is more blessed to give than to receive." For lest any one should think
that it was spoken with reference to them, and that he gave himself for an
ensample, as he elsewhere says, "giving an ensample to you" [Philippians 3:17],
he added the declaration of Christ, Who said, "It is more blessed to give than to
receive." He prayed over them while exhorting them: he shows it both by action,
— "And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all,"
[Acts 20:36]— he did not simply pray, but with much feeling: ([κατανύξεως]):
great was the consolation— and by his saying, "I commend you to the Lord. And
they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him, sorrowing most of all
for the words which he spoke, that they should see his face no more." (v. 37, 38.)
He had said, that "grievous wolves should enter in;" had said, "I am pure from
the blood of all men:" and yet the thing that grieved them most of all was this,
"that they should see him no more:" since indeed it was this that made the war
grievous. "And they accompanied them," it says, "unto the ship. And it came to
pass, that after we had torn ourselves from them"— so much did they love him,
such was their affection towards him— "and had launched, we came with a
straight course unto Coos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and from thence
unto Patara: and finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and
set forth. Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and
sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre" [Acts 21:1-3]: he came to Lycia, and
having left Cyprus, he sailed down to Tyre— "for there the ship was to unlade
her burden. And finding disciples, we tarried there seven days: who said to Paul
through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem." [Acts 21:4] They too
prophesy of the afflictions. It is so ordered that they should be spoken by them
also, that none might imagine that Paul said those things without cause, and only
by way of boasting. And there again they part from each other with prayer. "And
when we had accomplished those days, we departed, and went our way; and they
all brought us on our way, with wives and children, till we were out of the city:
and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed. And when we had taken our
leave one of another, we took ship; and they returned home again. And when we