John 12:1-2
"Then six days before the Passover He came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, and
feasted with them; and Martha served, but Lazarus sat at meat."
This was a proof of the genuineness of his resurrection, that after many
days he both lived and ate. "And Martha ministered"; whence it is clear that the
meal was in her house, for they received Jesus as loving and beloved. Some,
however, say, that it took place in the house of another. Mary did not minister,
for she was a disciple. Here again she acted in the more spiritual manner. For she
did not minister as being invited, nor did she afford her services to all alike. But
she directs the honor to Him alone, and approaches Him not as a man, but as a
God. On this account she poured out the ointment, and wiped (His feet) with the
hairs of her head, which was the action of one who did not entertain the same
opinion concerning Him as did others; yet Judas rebuked her, under the pretense
forsooth of carefulness. What then says Christ? "She has done a good work for
My burying." But why did He not expose the disciple in the case of the woman,
nor say to him what the Evangelist has declared, that on account of his own
thieving he rebuked her? In His abundant longsuffering He wished to bring him
to a better mind. For because He knew that he was a traitor, He from the
beginning often rebuked him, saying, "Not all believe," and, "One of you is a
devil." [John 6:64] He showed them that He knew him to be a traitor, yet He did
not openly rebuke him, but bare with him, desiring to recall him. How then says
another Evangelist, that all the disciples used these words? [Matthew 26:70] All
used them, and so did he, but the others not with like purpose. And if any one
ask why He put the bag of the poor in the hands of a thief, and made him
steward who was a lover of money, we would reply, that God knows the secret
reason; but that, if we may say something by conjecture, it was that He might cut
off from him all excuse. For he could not say that he did this thing from love of
money, (for he had in the bag sufficient to allay his desire,) but from excessive

wickedness which Christ wished to restrain, using much condescension towards
him. Wherefore He did not even rebuke him as stealing, although aware of it,
stopping the way to his wicked desire, and taking from him all excuse. "Let her
alone," He says, "for against the day of My burying has she done this." Again,
He makes mention of the traitor in speaking of His burial. But him the reproof
reaches not, nor does the expression soften him, though sufficient to inspire him
with pity: as if He had said, "I am burdensome and troublesome, but wait a little
while, and I shall depart." This too he intended in saying,

John 12:8
"But Me you have not always."
But none of these things turned back that savage madman; yet in truth Jesus
said and did far more than this, He washed his feet that night, made him a sharer
in the table and the salt, a thing which is wont to restrain even the souls of
robbers, and spoke other words, enough to melt a stone, and this, not long
before, but on the very day, in order that not even time might cause it to be
forgotten. But he stood out against all.
3. For a dreadful, a dreadful thing is the love of money, it disables both eyes
and ears, and makes men worse to deal with than a wild beast, allowing a man to
consider neither conscience, nor friendship, nor fellowship, nor the salvation of
his own soul, but having withdrawn them at once from all these things, like some
harsh mistress, it makes those captured by it its slaves. And the dreadful part of
so bitter a slavery is, that it persuades them even to be grateful for it; and the
more they become enslaved, the more does their pleasure increase; and in this
way especially the malady becomes incurable, in this way the monster becomes
hard to conquer. This made Gehazi a leper instead of a disciple and a prophet;
this destroyed Ananias and her with him; this made Judas a traitor; this corrupted
the rulers of the Jews, who received gifts, and became the partners of thieves.
This has brought in ten thousand wars, filling the ways with blood, the cities
with wailings and lamentations. This has made meals to become impure, and
tables accursed, and has filled food with transgression; therefore has Paul called
it "idolatry": [Colossians 3:5], and not even so has he deterred men from it. And
why calls he it "idolatry"? Many possess wealth, and dare not use it, but
consecrate it, handing it down untouched, not daring to touch it, as though it
were some dedicated thing. And if at any time they are forced to do so, they feel
as though they had done something unlawful. Besides, as the Greek carefully
tends his graven image, so thou entrusts your gold to doors and bars; providing a