THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.3.

mystery, we must take into consideration the representation of our
Lord's Passion, and the participation of its fruits; and the time
suitable for the celebration of this mystery ought to be determined
by each of these considerations. Now since, owing to our daily
defects, we stand in daily need of the fruits of our Lord's Passion,
this sacrament is offered regularly every day in the Church. Hence
our Lord teaches us to pray (Lk. 11:3): "Give us this day our daily
bread": in explanation of which words Augustine says (De Verb.
Dom. xxviii): "If it be a daily bread, why do you take it once a year, as
the Greeks have the custom in the east? Receive it daily that it may
benefit you every day."
But since our Lord's Passion was celebrated from the third to the
ninth hour, therefore this sacrament is solemnly celebrated by the
Church in that part of the day.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ's Passion is recalled in this sacrament,
inasmuch as its effect flows out to the faithful; but at Passion-tide
Christ's Passion is recalled inasmuch as it was wrought in Him Who
is our Head. This took place but once; whereas the faithful receive
daily the fruits of His Passion: consequently, the former is
commemorated but once in the year, whereas the latter takes place
every day, both that we may partake of its fruit and in order that we
may have a perpetual memorial.
Reply to Objection 2: The figure ceases on the advent of the reality.
But this sacrament is a figure and a representation of our Lord's
Passion, as stated above. And therefore on the day on which our
Lord's Passion is recalled as it was really accomplished, this
sacrament is not consecrated. Nevertheless, lest the Church be
deprived on that day of the fruit of the Passion offered to us by this
sacrament, the body of Christ consecrated the day before is
reserved to be consumed on that day; but the blood is not reserved,
on account of danger, and because the blood is more specially the
image of our Lord's Passion, as stated above (Question 78, Article 3,
ad 2). Nor is it true, as some affirm, that the wine is changed into
blood when the particle of Christ's body is dropped into it. Because
this cannot be done otherwise than by consecration under the due
form of words.
On Christmas Day, however, several masses are said on account of
Christ's threefold nativity. Of these the first is His eternal birth, which
is hidden in our regard. and therefore one mass is sung in the night,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.3.

in the "Introit" of which we say: "The Lord said unto Me: Thou art My
Son, this day have I begotten Thee." The second is His nativity in
time, and the spiritual birth, whereby Christ rises "as the day-star in
our hearts" (2 Pt. 1:19), and on this account the mass is sung at
dawn, and in the "Introit" we say: "The light will shine on us today."
The third is Christ's temporal and bodily birth, according as He went
forth from the virginal womb, becoming visible to us through being
clothed with flesh: and on that account the third mass is sung in
broad daylight, in the "Introit" of which we say: "A child is born to
us." Nevertheless, on the other hand, it can be said that His eternal
generation, of itself, is in the full light, and on this account in the
gospel of the third mass mention is made of His eternal birth. But
regarding His birth in the body, He was literally born during the
night, as a sign that He came to the darknesses of our infirmity;
hence also in the midnight mass we say the gospel of Christ's
nativity in the flesh.
Likewise on other days upon which many of God's benefits have to
be recalled or besought, several masses are celebrated on one day,
as for instance, one for the feast, and another for a fast or for the
dead.
Reply to Objection 3: As already observed (Question 73, Article 5),
Christ wished to give this sacrament last of all, in order that it might
make a deeper impression on the hearts of the disciples; and
therefore it was after supper, at the close of day, that He consecrated
this sacrament and gave it to His disciples. But we celebrate at the
hour when our Lord suffered, i.e. either, as on feast-days, at the hour
of Terce, when He was crucified by the tongues of the Jews (Mk.
15:25), and when the Holy Ghost descended upon the disciples (Acts
2:15); or, as when no feast is kept, at the hour of Sext, when He was
crucified at the hands of the soldiers (Jn. 19:14), or, as on fasting
days, at None, when crying out with a loud voice He gave up the
ghost (Mt. 27:46,50).
Nevertheless the mass can be postponed, especially when Holy
orders have to be conferred, and still more on Holy Saturday; both
on account of the length of the office, and also because orders
belong to the Sunday, as is set forth in the Decretals (dist. 75).
Masses, however, can be celebrated "in the first part of the day,"
owing to any necessity; as is stated De Consecr., dist. 1.