they exceed others even a little ("for one star," it says, "differs from another star
in glory,") [1 Corinthians 15:41], how are sinners to be in the same lot with the
righteous? Such a confusion as this even man would not make, much less God!
But if you will, I will show you that even in the case of sinners, arguing from
existing facts, there is this distinction, and exact just judgment. Now consider;
Adam sinned, and Eve sinned, and both transgressed, yet they were not equally
sinful. And therefore neither were they equally punished. For the difference was
so great that Paul said, "Adam was not deceived but the woman being deceived
was in the transgression." And yet the deceit was one. But still God's searching
examination pointed out a difference so great, as that Paul should make this
assertion. Again, Cain was punished, but Lamech, who committed a murder after
him, did not suffer near so great a punishment. And yet this was a murder, and
that was a murder, and that so much the worse, because even by the example he
had not become the better. But since the one neither killed his brother after
exhortation, nor needed an accuser, nor shrunk from answering when God
questioned him, but even without any accuser both pleaded again himself, and
condemned himself more severely, he obtained pardon. But the other as having
done the opposite was punished. See with what exactness God sifts the facts. For
this reason He punished those in the flood in one way, and those in Sodom in
another; and the Israelites again, both those in Babylon, and those in Antiochus'
time, in different ways: so showing that He keeps a strict account of our doings.
And these were slaves for seventy years, and those for four hundred, but others
again ate their children, and underwent countless other more grievous calamities,
and even in this way were not freed, either they or those that were burnt alive in
Sodom. "For it shall be more tolerable," He says, "for the land of Sodom and
Gomorrha, than for that city." [Matthew 10:15] For if He has no care for us,
either when we sin or when we do aright, perhaps there will be some reason in
saying that there is no punishment. But since He is so exceedingly urgent about
our not sinning, and adopts so many means to keep us in the right, it is very plain
that He punishes the wicked, and also crowns those that do right. But let me beg

you to consider the unfairness of the generality. For they find fault with God
because He so often long-suffering, overlooks so many that are impious, impure,
or violent, without now suffering punishment. Again, if He threaten to punish
them in the other world, they are vehement and pressing in their accusations.
And yet if this be painful, they ought to accept and admire the other. But alas the
folly! The unreasonable and asinine spirit! Alas the sin-loving soul, that gazes
after vice! For it is from this that all these opinions have their birth. And so if
they who utter these things should be minded to lay hold upon virtue, they will
presently find themselves satisfied concerning hell also, and will not doubt. And
where (it is said) and in what place is this hell? For some fablers say that it is in
the valley of Josaphat, thus drawing that which was said about a certain by-gone
war, to apply to hell. But the Scripture does not say this. But in what place, pray,
will it be? Somewhere as I think at least quite out of the pale of this world. For
as the prisons and mines are at a great distance from royal residences, so will
hell be somewhere out of this world. Seek we not then to know where it is, but
how we may escape it. Neither yet because God does not punish all here,
therefore disbelieve things to come. For merciful and long-suffering He is: that is
why he threatens, and does not cast us into it immediately. For "I desire not," He
says, "the death of a sinner." [Ezekiel 18:32] But if there is no death of a sinner,
the words are but idle. And I know indeed that there is nothing less pleasant to
you than these words. But to me nothing is pleasanter. And would it were
possible at our dinner, and our supper, and our baths, and everywhere, to be
discoursing about hell. For we should not then feel the pain at the evils in this
world, nor the pleasure of its good things. For what would you tell me was an
evil? poverty? Disease? captivity? Maiming of the body? Why all these things
are sport compared to the punishment there, even should you speak of those who
are tormented with famine all their life long; or those who are maimed from their
earliest days, and beg, even this is luxury compared to those other evils. Let us
then continually employ ourselves with talking about these things. For to
remember hell prevents our falling into hell. Do you not hear St. Paul saying,