4. The books of the Old Testament predicted that the joy of salvation would abound in messianic
times. The prophet Isaiah exultantly salutes the awaited Messiah: “You have multiplied the nation,
you have increased its joy” (9:3). He exhorts those who dwell on Zion to go forth to meet him with
song: “Shout aloud and sing for joy!” (12:6). The prophet tells those who have already seen him
from afar to bring the message to others: “Get you up to a high mountain, O herald of good tidings
to Zion; lift up your voice with strength, O herald of good tidings to Jerusalem” (40:9). All creation
shares in the joy of salvation: “Sing for joy, O heavens, and exult, O earth! Break forth, O
mountains, into singing! For the Lord has comforted his people, and will have compassion on his
suffering ones” (49:13).

Zechariah, looking to the day of the Lord, invites the people to acclaim the king who comes
“humble and riding on a donkey”: “Rejoice greatly, O daughter Zion! Shout aloud, O daughter
Jerusalem! Lo, your king comes to you; triumphant and victorious is he” (9:9).

Perhaps the most exciting invitation is that of the prophet Zephaniah, who presents God with his
people in the midst of a celebration overflowing with the joy of salvation. I find it thrilling to reread
this text: “The Lord, your God is in your midst, a warrior who gives you the victory; he will rejoice
over you with gladness, he will renew you in his love; he will exult over you with loud singing, as
on a day of festival” (3:17).

This is the joy which we experience daily, amid the little things of life, as a response to the loving
invitation of God our Father: “My child, treat yourself well, according to your means… Do not
deprive yourself of the day’s enjoyment” (Sir 14:11, 14). What tender paternal love echoes in these
words!

5. The Gospel, radiant with the glory of Christ’s cross, constantly invites us to rejoice. A few
examples will suffice. “Rejoice!” is the angel’s greeting to Mary (Lk 1:28). Mary’s visit to Elizabeth
makes John leap for joy in his mother’s womb (cf. Lk 1:41). In her song of praise, Mary proclaims:
“My spirit rejoices in God my Saviour” (Lk 1:47). When Jesus begins his ministry, John cries out:
“For this reason, my joy has been fulfilled” (Jn 3:29). Jesus himself “rejoiced in the Holy Spirit” (Lk
10:21). His message brings us joy: “I have said these things to you, so that my joy may be in you,
and that your joy may be complete” (Jn 15:11). Our Christian joy drinks of the wellspring of his
brimming heart. He promises his disciples: “You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will turn into joy”
(Jn 16:20). He then goes on to say: “But I will see you again and your hearts will rejoice, and no
one will take your joy from you” (Jn 16:22). The disciples “rejoiced” (Jn 20:20) at the sight of the
risen Christ. In the Acts of the Apostles we read that the first Christians “ate their food with glad
and generous hearts” (2:46). Wherever the disciples went, “there was great joy” (8:8); even amid
persecution they continued to be “filled with joy” (13:52). The newly baptized eunuch “went on his
way rejoicing” (8:39), while Paul’s jailer “and his entire household rejoiced that he had become a
believer in God” (16:34). Why should we not also enter into this great stream of joy?