Ps. lxix. 27.

view, that he might be saved by the spiritual One. For inasmuch as He had a pre-existence as a
saving Being, it was necessary that what might be saved should also be called into existence, in
order that the Being who saves should not exist in vain.
4. In accordance with this design, Mary the Virgin is found obedient, saying, "Behold the
handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." But Eve was disobedient; for she
did not obey when as yet she was a virgin. And even as she, having indeed a husband, Adam, but
being nevertheless as yet a virgin (for in Paradise "they were both naked, and were not ashamed,"
inasmuch as they, having been created a short time previously, had no understanding of the
procreation of children: for it was necessary that they should first come to adult age, and then
multiply from that time onward), having become disobedient, was made the cause of death, both
to herself and to the entire human race; so also did Mary, having a man betrothed [to her], and
being nevertheless a virgin, by yielding obedience, become the cause of salvation, both to herself
and the whole human race. And on this account does the law term a woman betrothed to a man,
the wife of him who had betrothed her, although she was as yet a virgin; thus indicating the
back-reference from Mary to Eve, because what is joined together could not otherwise be put
asunder than by inversion of the process by which these bonds of union had arisen; so that the
former ties be cancelled by the latter, that the latter may set the former again at liberty. And it has,
in fact, happened that the first compact looses from the second tie, but that the second tie takes the
position of the first which has been cancelled. For this reason did the Lord declare that the first
should in truth be last, and the last first. And the prophet, too, indicates the same, saying, "instead
of fathers, children have been born unto thee." For the Lord, having been born "the First-begotten
of the dead," and receiving into His bosom the ancient fathers, has regenerated them into the
life of God, He having been made Himself the beginning of those that live, as Adam became the
beginning of those who die. Wherefore also Luke, commencing the genealogy with the Lord,
carried it back to Adam, indicating that it was He who regenerated them into the Gospel of life,
and not they Him. And thus also it was that the knot of Eve's disobedience was loosed by the

Gen. ii. 25.
certe et quæ sequuntur, paulo subtiliora."

Comp. 1 Cor. xv. 20—22.

obedience of Mary. For what the virgin Eve had bound fast through unbelief, this did the virgin
Mary set free through faith.

### Chapter XXIII.—Arguments in opposition to Tatian, showing that it was consonant to divine
justice and mercy that the first Adam should first partake in that salvation offered to all by
Christ.