SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.5.

Reply to Objection 2: To love God with one's whole heart has a
twofold signification. First, actually, so that a man's whole heart be
always actually directed to God: this is the perfection of heaven.
Secondly, in the sense that a man's whole heart be habitually
directed to God, so that it consent to nothing contrary to the love of
God, and this is the perfection of the way. Venial sin is not contrary
to this latter perfection, because it does not destroy the habit of
charity, since it does not tend to a contrary object, but merely
hinders the use of charity.
Reply to Objection 3: That perfection of charity to which the
counsels are directed, is between the two perfections mentioned in
the preceding reply: and it consists in man renouncing, as much as
possible, temporal things, even such as are lawful, because they
occupy the mind and hinder the actual movement of the heart
towards God.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether to the words, "Thou shalt love the Lord

thy God with thy whole heart," it was fitting to add "and with
thy whole soul, and with thy whole strength"?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was unfitting to the words, "Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God, with thy whole heart," to add, "and with
thy whole soul, and with thy whole strength" (Dt. 6:5). For heart does
not mean here a part of the body, since to love God is not a bodily
action: and therefore heart is to be taken here in a spiritual sense.
Now the heart understood spiritually is either the soul itself or part of
the soul. Therefore it is superfluous to mention both heart and soul.
Objection 2: Further, a man's strength whether spiritual or corporal
depends on the heart. Therefore after the words, "Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with thy whole heart," it was unnecessary to add, "with
all thy strength."
Objection 3: Further, in Mt. 22:37 we read: "With all thy mind," which
words do not occur here. Therefore it seems that this precept is
unfittingly worded in Dt. 6.
On the contrary stands the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, This precept is differently worded in various places:
for, as we said in the first objection, in Dt. 6 three points are
mentioned: "with thy whole heart," and "with thy whole soul," and
"with thy whole strength." In Mt. 22 we find two of these mentioned,
viz. "with thy whole heart" and "with thy whole soul," while "with thy
whole strength" is omitted, but "with thy whole mind" is added. Yet
in Mark 12 we find all four, viz. "with thy whole heart," and "with thy
whole soul," and "with thy whole mind," and "with thy whole force"
which is the same as "strength." Moreover, these four are indicated
in Luke 10, where in place of "strength" or "force" we read "with all
thy might."
Accordingly these four have to be explained, since the fact that one
of them is omitted here or there is due to one implying another. We
must therefore observe that love is an act of the will which is here
denoted by the "heart," because just as the bodily heart is the
principle of all the movements of the body, so too the will, especially
as regards the intention of the last end which is the object of charity,