forth His hands to Heaven, nor did He need any prayer, but, as was meet for a
master commanding His handmaid, or a creator His creature, so did He quiet and
curb it by word and command only; and all the surge was straightway at an end,
and not one trace of the disturbance remained. For this the evangelist declared
saying, "And there was a great calm." [Matthew 8:26] And that which had been
spoken of the Father as a great thing, this He showed forth again by His works.
And what had been said concerning Him? "He spoke," it says, "and the stormy
wind ceased." So here likewise, He spoke, and "there was a great calm." And for
this most of all did the multitudes marvel at him; who would not have marvelled,
had He done it in such manner as did Moses.
2. Now when He is departed from the sea, there follows another miracle yet
more awful. For men possessed with devils, like wicked runaways at sight of
their master, said,
"What have we to do with You, Jesus, Thou Son of God? Have You come
hither to torment us before the time?" [Matthew 8:29]
For, because the multitudes called Him man, the devils came proclaiming
His Godhead, and they that heard not the sea swelling and subsiding, heard from
the devils the same cry, as it by its calm was loudly uttering.
Then, lest the thing might seem to come of flattery, according to their actual
experience they cry out and say, "Have You come hither to torment us before the
time?" With this view, then, their enmity is avowed beforehand, that their
entreaty may not incur suspicion. For indeed they were invisibly receiving
stripes, and the sea was not in such a storm as they; galled, and inflamed, and
suffering things intolerable from His mere presence. Accordingly, no man daring
to bring them to Him, Christ of Himself goes unto them.
And Matthew indeed relates that they said, "Have You come hither before
the time to torment us?" but the other evangelists have added, that they also
entreated and adjured Him not to cast them into the deep. For they supposed that
their punishment was now close upon them, and feared, as even now about to
fall into vengeance.

And though Luke and those who follow him say that it was one person, but
this evangelist two, this does not exhibit any discrepancy at all. I grant if they
had said, there was only one, and no other, they would appear to disagree with
Matthew; but if that spoke of the one, this of the two, the statement comes not of
disagreement, but of a different manner of narration. That is, I for my part think,
Luke singled out the fiercest one of them for his narrative, wherefore also in
more tragical wise does he report their miserable case; as, for instance, that
bursting his bonds and chains he used to wander about the wilderness. And Mark
says, that he also cut himself with the stones.
And their words too are such as well betray their implacable and shameless
nature. For, says he, "Are you come hither to torment us before the time?" You
see, that they had sinned, they could not deny, but they demand not to suffer
their punishment before the time. For, since He had caught them in the act of
perpetrating those horrors so incurable and lawless, and deforming and
punishing His creature in every way; and they supposed that He, for the excess
of their crimes, would not await the time of their punishment: therefore they
besought and entreated Him: and they that endured not even bands of iron come
bound, and they that run about the mountains, are gone forth into the plain; and
those who hinder all others from passing, at sight of Him blocking up the way,
stand still.
3. But what can be the reason that they love also to dwell in the tombs?
They would fain suggest to the multitude a pernicious opinion, as though the
souls of the dead become demons, which God forbid we should ever admit into
our conception. "But what then will you say," one may ask, "when many of the
sorcerers take children and slay them, in order to have the soul afterwards to
assist them?" Why, whence is this evident? For of their slaying them, indeed,
many tell us, but as to the souls of the slain being with them, whence do you
know it, I pray you? "The possessed themselves," it is replied, "cry out, I am the
soul of such a one." But this too is a kind of stage-play, and devilish deceit. For
it is not the spirit of the dead that cries out, but the evil spirit that feigns these