FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.4.

are referable to his last end. Wherefore all the moral virtues must
needs be infused together with charity, since it is through them that
man performs each different kind of good work.
It is therefore clear that the infused moral virtues are connected, not
only through prudence, but also on account of charity: and, again,
that whoever loses charity through mortal sin, forfeits all the infused
moral virtues.
Reply to Objection 1: In order that the act of a lower power be
perfect, not only must there be perfection in the higher, but also in
the lower power: for if the principal agent were well disposed, perfect
action would not follow, if the instrument also were not well
disposed. Consequently, in order that man work well in things
referred to the end, he needs not only a virtue disposing him well to
the end, but also those virtues which dispose him well to whatever is
referred to the end: for the virtue which regards the end is the chief
and moving principle in respect of those things that are referred to
the end. Therefore it is necessary to have the moral virtues together
with charity.
Reply to Objection 2: It happens sometimes that a man who has a
habit, finds it difficult to act in accordance with the habit, and
consequently feels no pleasure and complacency in the act, on
account of some impediment supervening from without: thus a man
who has a habit of science, finds it difficult to understand, through
being sleepy or unwell. In like manner sometimes the habits of moral
virtue experience difficulty in their works, by reason of certain
ordinary dispositions remaining from previous acts. This difficulty
does not occur in respect of acquired moral virtue: because the
repeated acts by which they are acquired, remove also the contrary
dispositions.
Reply to Objection 3: Certain saints are said not to have certain
virtues, in so far as they experience difficulty in the acts of those
virtues, for the reason stated; although they have the habits of all the
virtues.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.4.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether faith and hope can be without charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith and hope are never without
charity. Because, since they are theological virtues, they seem to be
more excellent than even the infused moral virtues. But the infused
moral virtues cannot be without charity. Neither therefore can faith
and hope be without charity.
Objection 2: Further, "no man believes unwillingly" as Augustine
says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.). But charity is in the will as a perfection
thereof, as stated above (Question 62, Article 3). Therefore faith
cannot be without charity.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (Enchiridion viii) that "there can
be no hope without love." But love is charity: for it is of this love that
he speaks. Therefore hope cannot be without charity.
On the contrary, A gloss on Mt. 1:2 says that "faith begets hope, and
hope, charity." Now the begetter precedes the begotten, and can be
without it. Therefore faith can be without hope; and hope, without
charity.
I answer that, Faith and hope, like the moral virtues, can be
considered in two ways; first in an inchoate state; secondly, as
complete virtues. For since virtue is directed to the doing of good
works, perfect virtue is that which gives the faculty of doing a
perfectly good work, and this consists in not only doing what is
good, but also in doing it well. Else, if what is done is good, but not
well done, it will not be perfectly good; wherefore neither will the
habit that is the principle of such an act, have the perfect character
of virtue. For instance, if a man do what is just, what he does is
good: but it will not be the work of a perfect virtue unless he do it
well, i.e. by choosing rightly, which is the result of prudence; for
which reason justice cannot be a perfect virtue without prudence.
Accordingly faith and hope can exist indeed in a fashion without
charity: but they have not the perfect character of virtue without
charity. For, since the act of faith is to believe in God; and since to
believe is to assent to someone of one's own free will: to will not as
one ought, will not be a perfect act of faith. To will as one ought is
the outcome of charity which perfects the will: since every right