not make. Hence from the fact that He can make more than He
makes, it does not follow that He can know more than He knows,
unless this be referred to the knowledge of vision, according to
which He is said to know those things which are in act in some
period of time. But from the fact that He knows some things might be
which are not, or that some things might not be which are, it does
not follow that His knowledge is variable, but rather that He knows
the variability of things. If, however, anything existed which God did
not previously know, and afterwards knew, then His knowledge
would be variable. But this could not be; for whatever is, or can be in
any period of time, is known by God in His eternity. Therefore from
the fact that a thing exists in some period of time, it follows that it is
known by God from eternity. Therefore it cannot be granted that God
can know more than He knows; because such a proposition implies
that first of all He did not know, and then afterwards knew.
Reply to Objection 3: The ancient Nominalists said that it was the
same thing to say "Christ is born" and "will be born" and "was
born"; because the same thing is signified by these three---viz. the
nativity of Christ. Therefore it follows, they said, that whatever God
knew, He knows; because now He knows that Christ is born, which
means the same thing as that Christ will be born. This opinion,
however, is false; both because the diversity in the parts of a
sentence causes a diversity of enunciations; and because it would
follow that a proposition which is true once would be always true;
which is contrary to what the Philosopher lays down (Categor. iii)
when he says that this sentence, "Socrates sits," is true when he is
sitting, and false when he rises up. Therefore, it must be conceded
that this proposition is not true, "Whatever God knew He knows," if
referred to enunciable propositions. But because of this, it does not
follow that the knowledge of God is variable. For as it is without
variation in the divine knowledge that God knows one and the same
thing sometime to be, and sometime not to be, so it is without
variation in the divine knowledge that God knows an enunciable
proposition is sometime true, and sometime false. The knowledge of
God, however, would be variable if He knew enunciable things by
way of enunciation, by composition and division, as occurs in our
intellect. Hence our knowledge varies either as regards truth and
falsity, for example, if when either as regards truth and falsity, for
example, if when a thing suffers change we retained the same
opinion about it; or as regards diverse opinions, as if we first
thought that anyone was sitting, and afterwards thought that he was
not sitting; neither of which can be in God.

### ARTICLE 16. Whether God has a speculative knowledge of