will gainsay the divinity of the Preaching? Was not their ignorance enough to
procure them to be condemned? Would it not then in this case too, affright them?
For you know that by these two passions the many are possessed, vainglory and
cowardice. Suppose their ignorance suffered them not to feel ashamed, still the
dangers must have put them in fear.
But, says one, they wrought miracles. You do believe then that they
wrought miracles. But did they not work miracles? This is a greater miracle than
to work them, if men were drawn to them without miracles. Socrates too among
the Greeks was put in bonds. What then? Did not his disciples straightway flee
to Megara? Assuredly, why not? They admitted his arguments about immortality.
But see here. Paul was put in bonds, and his disciples waxed the more confident,
with reason, for they saw that the Preaching was not hindered. For, can you put
the tongue in bonds? Hereby chiefly it runs. For as, except thou have bound the
feet of a runner, you have not prevented him from running; so, except thou have
bound the tongue of an evangelist, you have not hindered him from running.
And as the former, if you have bound his loins, runs on the rather, and is
supported, so too the latter preaches the rather, and with greater boldness.
A prisoner is in fear, when there is nothing beyond bonds: but one that
despises death, how should he be bound? They did the same as if they had put in
bonds the shadow of Paul, and had gagged its mouth. For it was a fighting with
shadows; for he was both more tenderly regretted by his friends, and more
reverenced by his enemies, as bearing the prize for courage in his bonds. And a
crown binds the head; but it disgraces it not, yea rather, it makes it brilliant.
Against their wills they crowned him with his chain. For, tell me, was it possible
he could fear iron, who braved the adamantine gates of death? Come we,
beloved, to emulate these bonds. As many of you women as deck yourselves
with trinkets of gold, long ye for the bonds of Paul. Not so glitters the collar
round your necks, as the grace of these iron bonds gleamed about his soul! If any
longs for those, let him hate these. For what communion has softness with
courage; tricking out of the body with philosophy? Those bonds Angels

reverence, these they even make a mock of; those bonds are wont to draw up
from earth to heaven; these bonds draw down to earth from heaven. For in truth
these are bonds, not those; those are ornament, these are bonds; these, along with
the body, afflict the soul also; those, along with the body, adorn as well the soul.
Would you be convinced that those are ornament? Tell me which would
more have won the notice of the spectators? thou or Paul? And why do I say,
"thou"? The queen herself who is all bedecked with gold would not have
attracted the spectators so much; but if it had chanced that both Paul in his bonds
and the queen had entered the Church at the same time, all would have removed
their eyes from her to him; and with good reason. For to see a man of a nature
greater than human, and having nought of man, but an angel upon earth, is more
admirable than to see a woman decked with finery. For such indeed one may see
both in theaters, and in pageants, and at baths, and many places; but whoso sees
a man with bonds upon him, and deeming himself to have the greatest of
ornaments, and not giving way under his bonds, does not behold a spectacle of
earth, but one worthy of the heavens. The soul that is in that way attired looks
about—who has seen? Who not seen?— is filled with pride, is possessed with
anxious thoughts, is bound with countless other passions: but he that has these
bonds on him, is without pride: his soul exults, is freed from every anxious care,
is joyous, has its gaze on heaven, is clad with wings. If any one were to give me
the choice of seeing Paul either stooping out of heaven, and uttering his voice, or
out of the prison, I would choose the prison. For they of heaven visit him when
he is in the prison. The bonds of Paul were the bond of the Preaching, that chain
of his was its foundation. Long we for those bonds!
And how, some one says, may this be? If we break up and dash in pieces
these. No good results to us from these bonds, but even harm. These will show
us as prisoners There; but the bonds of Paul will loose those bonds; she that is
bound with these here, with those deathless bonds shall she also be bound There,
both hands and feet; she that has been bound with Paul's, shall have them in that
day as it were an ornament about her. Free both yourself from your bonds, and