so that, whatever He should say, they might lay hold of it; and if He should
answer in favor of the Herodians, themselves might find fault with Him, but if in
their favor, the others should accuse Him. And yet He had given the didrachmas,
but they knew not that.
And in either way indeed they expected to lay hold of Him; but they desired
rather that He should say something against the Herodians. Wherefore they send
their disciples also to urge Him thereto by their presence, that they might deliver
Him to the governor as an usurper. For this Luke also intimates and shows, by
saying, that they asked also in the presence of the multitude, so that the
testimony should be the stronger.
But the result was altogether opposite; for in a larger body of spectators
they afforded the demonstration of their folly.
And see their flattery, and their hidden craft. "We know," their words are,
"that You are true." How said ye then, "He is a deceiver," and "deceives the
people," and "has a devil," and "is not of God?" how a little while before did ye
devise to slay Him?
But they are at everything, whatsoever their craft against Him may suggest.
For since, when a little before they had said in self will, "By what authority doest
Thou these things?" [Matthew 21:23] they did not meet with an answer to the
question, they look to puff Him up by their flattery, and to persuade Him to say
something against the established laws, and opposed to the prevailing
government.
Wherefore also they testify the truth unto Him, confessing what was really
so, nevertheless, not with an upright mind, nor willingly; and add thereto,
saying, "You care not for any man." See how plainly they are desiring to urge
Him to these sayings, that would make Him both offend Herod, and incur the
suspicion of being an usurper, as standing up against the laws, so that they might
punish Him, as a mover of sedition, and an usurper. For in saying, "You care not
for any man," and, "Thou regardest not the person of man," they were hinting at
Herod and Cæsar.

"Tell us therefore, what thinkest Thou?" Now ye honor Him, and esteem
Him a Teacher, having despised and insulted Him oftentimes, when He was
discoursing of the things that concern your salvation. Whence also they have
become confederates.
And see their craftiness. They say not, Tell us what is good, what is
expedient, what is lawful? But, "What thinkest Thou?" So much did they look to
this one object, to betray Him, and to set Him at enmity with the rulers. And
Mark declaring this, and more plainly discovering their self-will, and their
murderous disposition, affirms them to have said, "Shall we give Cæsar tribute,
or shall we not give?" [Mark 12:15] So that they were breathing anger, and
travailing with a plot against Him, yet they feigned respect.
What then says He? "Why do you tempt me, you hypocrites?" Do you see
how He talks with them with more than usual severity? For since their
wickedness was now complete and manifest, He cuts the deeper, first
confounding and silencing them, by publishing their secret thoughts, and making
it manifest to all with what kind of intent they are coming unto Him.
And these things He did, repulsing their wickedness, so that they might not
suffer hurt in attempting the same things again. And yet their words were full of
much respect, for they both called Him Master, and bore witness to His truth,
and that He was no respecter of persons; but being God, He was deceived by
none of these things. Wherefore they also ought to have conjectured, that the
rebuke was not the result of conjecture, but a sign of His knowing their secret
thoughts.
2. He stopped not, however, at the rebuke, although it was enough merely to
have convicted them of their purpose, and to have put them to shame for their
wickedness; but He stops not at this, but in another way closes their mouths; for,
"Show me," says He, "the tribute money." And when they had shown it, as He
ever does, by their tongue He brings out the decision, and causes them to decide,
that it is lawful; which was a clear and plain victory. So that, when He asks, not
from ignorance does He ask, but because it is His will to cause them to be bound