THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.4.

neighboring parts of Judea that lie to the east of the region inhabited
by the Jews. Yet it is to be believed that certain signs of Christ's
birth appeared also in other parts of the world: thus, at Rome the
river flowed with oil [Eusebius, Chronic. II, Olymp. 185]; and in Spain
three suns were seen, which gradually merged into one [Eusebius,
Chronic. II, Olymp. 184].
Reply to Objection 4: As Chrysostom observes (Theophylact., Enarr.
in Luc. ii, 8), the angel who announced Christ's birth did not go to
Jerusalem, nor did he seek the Scribes and Pharisees, for they were
corrupted, and full of ill-will. But the shepherds were single-minded,
and were like the patriarchs and Moses in their mode of life.
Moreover, these shepherds were types of the Doctors of the Church,
to whom are revealed the mysteries of Christ that were hidden from
the Jews.
Reply to Objection 5: As Ambrose says (on Lk. 2:25): "It was right
that our Lord's birth should be attested not only by the shepherds,
but also by people advanced in age and virtue": whose testimony is
rendered the more credible by reason of their righteousness.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ Himself should have made His

birth know?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should have Himself made His
birth known. For "a direct cause is always of greater power than an
indirect cause," as is stated Phys. viii. But Christ made His birth
known through others---for instance, to the shepherds through the
angels, and to the Magi through the star. Much more, therefore,
should He Himself have made His birth known.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 20:32): "Wisdom that is hid
and treasure that is not seen; what profit is there in them both?" But
Christ had, to perfection, the treasure of wisdom and grace from the
beginning of His conception. Therefore, unless He had made the
fulness of these gifts known by words and deeds, wisdom and grace
would have been given Him to no purpose. But this is unreasonable:
because "God and nature do nothing without a purpose" (De Coelo
i).
Objection 3: Further, we read in the book De Infantia Salvatoris that
in His infancy Christ worked many miracles. It seems therefore that
He did Himself make His birth known.
On the contrary, Pope Leo says (Serm. xxxiv) that the Magi found the
"infant Jesus in no way different from the generality of human
infants." But other infants do not make themselves known. Therefore
it was not fitting that Christ should Himself make His birth known.
I answer that, Christ's birth was ordered unto man's salvation, which
is by faith. But saving faith confesses Christ's Godhead and
humanity. It behooved, therefore, Christ's birth to be made known in
such a way that the proof of His Godhead should not be prejudicial
to faith in His human nature. But this took place while Christ
presented a likeness of human weakness, and yet, by means of
God's creatures, He showed the power of the Godhead in Himself.
Therefore Christ made His birth known, not by Himself, but by means
of certain other creatures.
Reply to Objection 1: By the way of generation and movement we
must of necessity come to the imperfect before the perfect. And
therefore Christ was made known first through other creatures, and