sin and grace are not equivalents, death and life are not equivalents, the Devil
and God are not equivalents, but there is a boundless space between them. When
then as well from the nature of the thing as from the power of Him that transacts
it, and from the very suitableness thereof (for it suits much better with God to
save than to punish), the preëminence and victory is upon this side, what one
word have you to say for unbelief, tell me? However, that what had been done
was reasonable, he shows in the following words.
Ver. 15. "But not as the offense, so is also the free gift. For if through the
offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace,
which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto the many."
For what he says is somewhat of this kind. If sin had so extensive effects,
and the sin of one man too; how can grace, and that the grace of God, not the
Father only, but also the Son, do otherwise than be the more abundant of the
two? For the latter is far the more reasonable supposition. For that one man
should be punished on account of another does not seem to be much in
accordance with reason. But for one to be saved on account of another is at once
more suitable and more reasonable. If then the former took place, much more
may the latter. Hence he has shown from these grounds the likelihood and
reasonableness of it. For when the former had been made good, this would then
be readily admitted. But that it is even necessarily so, he makes good from what
follows. How then does he make it good?
Ver. 16. "And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift. For the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification."
And what is this that he is speaking of? It is that sin had power to bring in
death and condemnation; but grace did not do away that one sin only, but also
those that followed after in its train. Lest then the words "as" and "so" might
seem to make the measure of the blessings and the evils equal, and that you
might not think, upon hearing of Adam, that it was only that sin which he had
brought in which was done away with, he says that it was from many offenses

that an indemnity was brought about. How is this plain? Because after the
numberless sins committed after that in paradise, the matter issued in
justification. But where righteousness is, there of necessity follows by all means
life, and the countless blessings, as does death where sin was. For righteousness
is more than life, since it is even the root of life. That there were several goods
then brought in, and that it was not that sin only that was taken away, but all the
rest along with it, he points out when he says, that "the gift was of many offenses
unto justification." In which a proof is necessarily included, that death was also
torn up by the roots. But since he had said, that the second was greater than the
first, he is obliged to give further grounds again for this same thing. For, before,
he had said that if one man's sin slew all, much more will the grace of One have
the power to save. After that he shows that it was not that sin only that was done
away by the grace, but all the rest too, and that it was not that the sins were done
away only, but that righteousness was given. And Christ did not merely do the
same amount of good that Adam did of harm, but far more and greater good.
Since then he had made such declarations as these, he wants again here also
further confirmation of these. And how does he give this confirmation? He says,
Ver. 17. "For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they
which receive abundance of grace and of the gift and (so Field with most
manuscripts) of righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ."
What he says, amounts to this nearly. What armed death against the world?
The one man's eating from the tree only. If then death attained so great power
from one offense, when it is found that certain received a grace and
righteousness out of all proportion to that sin, how shall they still be liable to
death? And for this cause, he does not here say "grace," but "superabundance of
grace." For it was not as much as we must have to do away the sin only, that we
received of His grace, but even far more. For we were at once freed from
punishment, and put off all iniquity, and were also born again from above [John
3:3] and rose again with the old man buried, and were redeemed, justified, led up
to adoption, sanctified, made brothers of the Only-begotten, and joint heirs and