intimates, thus saying, "You shall indeed drink of My cup, and be baptized with
the baptism that I am baptized with;" [Matthew 20:23] i.e., you shall be martyrs,
you shall be slain for My sake; but to sit on My right hand, and on My left, (not
as though any sit on the right hand and the left, but meaning the highest
precedency and honor) "is not Mine to give," says He, "but to those for whom it
is prepared." Then signifying for whom it is prepared, He calls them and says,
"whosoever among you will be chief, let him be servant to you all;" [Matthew
20:26] setting forth humility and love. And the love which He requires is
intense; wherefore He stopped not even at this, but added, "even as the Son of
Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His life a
ransom for many;" pointing out that we ought so to love as even to be slain for
our beloved. For this above all is to love Him. Wherefore also He says to Peter,
"If you love Me, feed My sheep." [John 21:16]
11. And that you may learn how great a work of virtue it is, let us sketch it
out in word, since in deeds we see it no where appearing; and let us consider, if it
were every where in abundance, how great benefits would ensue: how there
were no need then of laws, or tribunals or punishments, or avenging, or any
other such things since if all loved and were beloved, no man would injure
another. Yea, murders, and strifes, and wars, and divisions, and rapines, and
frauds, and all evils would be removed, and vice be unknown even in name.
Miracles, however, would not have effected this; they rather puff up such as are
not on their guard, unto vain-glory and folly.
Again: what is indeed the marvellous part of love; all the other good things
have their evils yoked with them: as he that gives up his possessions is
oftentimes puffed up on this account: the eloquent is affected with a wild passion
for glory; the humble-minded, on this very ground, not seldom thinks highly of
himself in his conscience. But love is free from every such mischief. For none
could ever be lifted up against the person whom he loves. And do not, I pray,
suppose one person only loving but all alike; and then will you see its virtue. Or
rather, if you will, first suppose one single person beloved, and one loving;

loving, however, as it is meet to love. Why, he will so live on earth as if it were
heaven, every where enjoying a calm and weaving for himself innumerable
crowns. For both from envy, and wrath, and jealousy, and pride, and vain-glory,
and evil concupiscence, and every profane love, and every distemper, such a
man will keep his own soul pure. Yea, even as no one would do himself an injury
so neither would this man his neighbors. And being such, he shall stand with
Gabriel himself, even while he walks on earth.
Such then is he that has love. But he that works miracles and has perfect
knowledge, without this, though he raises ten thousand from the dead, will not
be much profited, broken off as he is from all and not enduring to mix himself up
with any of his fellow-servants. For no other cause than this did Christ say that
the sign of perfect love towards Him is the loving one's neighbors. For, "if you
love Me," says He, "O Peter, more than these, feed My sheep." [John 21:15] Do
you see how hence also He again covertly intimates, in what case this is greater
than martyrdom? For if any one had a beloved child in whose behalf he would
even give up his life, and some one were to love the father, but pay no regard
whatever to the son, he would greatly incense the father; nor would he feel the
love for himself, because of the overlooking his son. Now if this ensue in the
case of father and son, much more in the case of God and men: since surely God
is more loving than any parents.
Wherefore, having said, "The first and great commandment is, You shall
love the Lord your God," he added, "and the second— (He leaves it not in
silence, but sets it down also)— is like it, You shall love your neighbor as
yourself." And see how with nearly the same excellency He demands also this.
For as concerning God, He says, "with all your heart:" so concerning your
neighbor, "as yourself," which is tantamount to, "with all your heart."
Yea, and if this were duly observed, there would be neither slave nor free,
neither ruler nor ruled, neither rich nor poor, neither small nor great; nor would
any devil then ever have been known: I say not, Satan only, but whatever other
such spirit there be, nay, rather were there a hundred or ten thousand such, they