to scourge, and to crucify Him; and the third day He shall rise again" [Matthew
20:18-19], and said not, "My Father shall raise Me up again.") How then did He
pray concerning this? But for whom did He pray? For those who believed on
Him.
And what he means is this, 'He is readily listened to.' For since they had not
yet the right opinion concerning Him, he said that He was heard. Just as He
Himself also when consoling His disciples said, "If you loved Me, you would
rejoice, because I go to My Father" [John 14:28], and "My Father is greater
than I." But how did He not glorify Himself, He who "made Himself of no
reputation" [Philippians 2:7], He who gave Himself up? For, it is said, "He gave
Himself" up "for our sins." [See ] And again, "Who gave Himself a ransom for
us all." [1 Timothy 2:6] What is it then? You see that it is in reference to the
flesh that lowly things are spoken concerning Himself: So also here, "Although
He were Son, He was heard in that He feared," it is said. He wishes to show, that
the success was of Himself, rather than of God's favor. So great (he says) was
His reverence, that even on account thereof God had respect unto Him.
"He learned," he says, to obey God. Here again he shows how great is the
gain of sufferings. "And having been made perfect," he says, "He became the
Author of salvation to them that obey Him." (Cf. supra, pp. 384, 391.) But if He,
being the Son, gained obedience from His sufferings, much more shall we. Do
you see how many things he discourses about obedience, that they might be
persuaded to it? For it seems to me that they would not be restrained. "From the
things," he says, "which He suffered He" continually "learned" to obey God .
And being "made perfect" through sufferings. This then is perfection, and by this
means must we arrive at perfection. For not only was He Himself saved, but
became to others also an abundant supply of salvation. For "being made perfect
He became the Author of salvation to them that obey Him."

Hebrews 5:11-12
4. "Being called," he says, "of God an High Priest after the order of
Melchisedech": [Hebrews 5:11] "Of whom we have many things to say and hard
to be uttered [or explained]." When he was about to proceed to the difference of
the Priesthood, he first reproves them, pointing out both that such great
condescension was "milk," and that it was because they were children that he
dwelt longer on the lowly subject, relating to the flesh, and speaks [about Him]
as about any righteous man. And see, he neither kept silence as to the doctrine
altogether, nor did he utter it; that on the one hand, he might raise their thoughts,
and persuade them to be perfect, and that they might not be deprived of the great
doctrines; and on the other, that he might not overwhelm their minds.
"Of whom," he says, "we have many things to say and hard to be explained,
seeing you are dull of hearing." Because they do not hear, the doctrine is "hard
to be explained." For when one has to do with men who do not go along with
him nor mind the things that are spoken, he cannot well explain the subject to
them.
But perhaps some one of you that stand here, is puzzled, and thinks it a hard
case, that owing to the Hebrews, he himself is hindered from hearing the more
perfect doctrines. Nay rather, I think that perhaps here also except a few, there
are many such [as they], so that this may be said concerning yourselves also: but
for the sake of those few I will speak.
Did he then keep entire silence, or did he resume the subject again in what
follows; and do the same as in the Epistle to the Romans? For there too, when he
had first stopped the mouths of the gainsayers, and said, "Nay but, O man, who
are you that repliest against God?" [Romans 9:20], he then subjoined the
solution. And for my own part I think that he was not even altogether silent, and
yet did not speak it out, in order to lead the hearers to a longing [for the