cared for. For nature does not allow these to take place together.
4. Wherefore he says, "He that is joined to a harlot is one body; but he that
is joined to the Lord is one Spirit." For such an one becomes thenceforth Spirit,
although a body envelope him. For when nothing corporeal nor gross nor earthly
is around him, the body does but merely envelope him; since the whole
government of him is in the soul and the Spirit. In this way God is glorified.
Wherefore both in the Prayer we are commanded to say, "Hallowed be Your
Name:" and Christ says also, "Let your light shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven."
So do the heavens also glorify Him, uttering no voice, but by the view of
them attracting wonder and referring the glory unto the Great Artificer. So let us
glorify Him also, or rather more than they. For we can if we will. For not so
much do the heaven nor day nor night glorify God, as a holy soul. For as one
that gazes upon the beauty of the heaven, says, "Glory be to You, O God! How
fair a work have you formed!" so too when beholding virtue in any man: nay,
and much more so in the latter instance. For from these works of creation all do
not glorify God; but many even assert that the things which exist are selfmoving: and others impute to demons the workmanship of the world and
providence; and these indeed greatly and unpardonably err: but in regard to the
virtue of man, no one shall have power to hold these shameless opinions, but
shall assuredly glorify God when he sees him that serves Him living in
goodness. For who shall help being astonished when one being a man, and
partaking of our common nature, and living among other men, like adamant
yields not at all to the swarm of passions? When being in the midst of fire and
iron and wild beasts, he is even harder than adamant and vanquishes all for the
Word of godliness' sake? When he is injured, and blesses; when he is evil
reported of, and praises; when he is despitefully used, and prays for those who
injure him; when he is plotted against, and does good to those that fight with him
and lay snares for him? For these things, and such as these, will glorify God far
more than the heaven. For the Greeks when they behold the heavens feel no awe;

but when they see a holy man exhibiting a severe course of life with all
strictness, they shrink away and condemn themselves. Since when he that
partakes of the same nature as themselves is so much above them, a great deal
more so than the heaven is above the earth, even against their inclination they
think that it is a Divine power which works these things. Wherefore He says,
"And glorify your Father which is in heaven."
5. Will you learn also from another place how by the life of His servants
God is glorified, and how by miracles? Nebuchadnezzar once threw the Three
Children into the furnace. Then when he saw that the fire had not prevailed over
them, he says, [Daniel 3:28. Septuagint. ἐκ τῆς καμίνου] added "Blessed be God,
who has sent His Angel, and delivered his servants out of the furnace, because
they trusted in Him and have changed the word of the king." "How do you say?
Have you been despised, and do you admire those who have spit upon you?"
"Yes," says he, "and for this very reason, that I was despised." And of the marvel
he gives this reason. So that not because of the miracle alone was glory given to
God at that time, but also because of the purpose of those who have been thrown
in. Now if any one would examine this point and the other, as they are in
themselves, this will appear not less than that: for to persuade souls to brave a
furnace is not less in respect of the wonder than to deliver from a furnace. For
how can it be otherwise than astonishing for the Emperor of the world, with so
many arms around him, and legions, and generals, and viceroys, and consuls,
and land and sea subject to his sway, to be despised by captive children; for the
bound to overcome the binder and conquer all that army? Neither was there any
power in the king and his company to do what they would, no, not even with the
furnaces for an ally. But they who were naked, and slaves, and strangers, and
few, (for what number could be more contemptible than three?) being in chains,
vanquished an innumerable army. For already now was death despised, since
Christ was henceforth about to sojourn in the world. And as when the sun is on
the point of rising, even before his rays appear the light of the day grows bright;
so also when then the Sun of Righteousness was about to come, death henceforth