Do you see that he says, I have therefore said this, that you may not seek it
from men. "Delude you," he says, "with persuasiveness of speech." For what if
any does speak, and speak persuasively?
Ver. 5. "For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit."
The direct thing to have said here was, "even though I be absent in the flesh,
yet, nevertheless, I know the deceivers"; but instead he has ended with praise,
"Joying and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ."
"Your order," he means, your good order. "And the steadfastness of your faith in
Christ." This is still more in the way of encomium. And he said not "faith," but
steadfastness, as to soldiers standing in good order and firmly. Now that which is
steadfast, neither deceit nor trial can shake asunder. Not only, he says, have ye
not fallen, but no one has so much as thrown you into disorder. He has set
himself over them, that they may fear him as though present; for thus is order
preserved. From solidity follows compactedness, for you will then produce
solidity, when having brought many things together, you shall cement them
compactedly and inseparably; thus a solidity is produced, as in the case of a wall.
But this is the peculiar work of love; for those who were by themselves, when it
has closely cemented and knit them together, it renders solid. And faith, again,
does the same thing; when it allows not reasonings to intrude themselves. For as
reasonings divide, and shake loose, so faith causes solidity and compactness.
For seeing God has bestowed upon us benefits surpassing man's reasoning,
suitably enough He has brought in faith. It is not possible to be steadfast, when
demanding reasons. For behold all our lofty doctrines, how destitute they are of
reasonings, and dependent upon faith alone. God is not anywhere, and is
everywhere. What has less reason in it than this? Each by itself is full of
difficulty. For, indeed, He is not in place; nor is there any place in which He is.
He was not made, He made not Himself, He never began to be. What reasoning
will receive this, if there be not faith? Does it not seem to be utterly ridiculous,
and more endless than a riddle?
Now that He has no beginning, and is uncreate, and uncircumscribed, and

infinite, is, as we have said, a manifest difficulty; but let us consider His
incorporealness, whether we can search out this by reasoning. God is
incorporeal. What is incorporeal? A bare word, and no more, for the
apprehension has received nothing, has impressed nothing upon itself; for if it
does so impress, it comes to nature, and what constitutes body. So that the mouth
speaks indeed, but the understanding knows not what it speaks, save one thing
only, that it is not body, this is all it knows. And why do I speak of God? In the
case of the soul, which is created, inclosed, circumscribed, what is
incorporealness? Say! show! You can not. Is it air? But air is body, even though
it be not compact, and it is plain from many proofs that it is a yielding body. Fire
is body, while the energy of the soul is bodiless. Wherefore? Since it penetrates
everywhere. If it is not itself body, then that which is incorporeal exists in place,
therefore it is circumscribed; and that which is circumscribed has figure; and
figures are linear, and lines belong to bodies. Again, that which is without figure,
what conception does it admit? It has no figure, no form, no outline. Do you see
how the understanding becomes dizzy?
Again, That Nature [viz. God's] is not susceptible of evil. But He is also
good of His own will; it is therefore susceptible. But one may not so say, far be
it! Again, was He brought into being, willing it, or not willing it? But neither
may one say this. Again, circumscribes He the world, or no? If He circumscribes
it not, He is Himself circumscribed, but if He circumscribes it, He is infinite in
His nature. Again, circumscribes He Himself? If He circumscribes Himself, then
He is not without beginning to Himself, but to us; therefore He is not in His
nature without beginning. Everywhere one must grant contradictories.
Do you see how great the darkness is; and how everywhere there is need of
faith. This it is, that is solid. But, if you will, let us come to things which are less
than these. That substance has an operation. And what in His case is operation?
Is it a certain motion? Then He is not immutable: for that which is moved, is not
immutable: for, from being motionless it becomes in motion. But nevertheless
He is in motion, and never stands still. But what kind of motion, tell me; for