FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.7.

could suffice him for salvation: and accordingly, in order that his
pride might be overcome in this matter, man was left to the guidance
of his reason without the help of a written law: and man was able to
learn from experience that his reason was deficient, since about the
time of Abraham man had fallen headlong into idolatry and the most
shameful vices. Wherefore, after those times, it was necessary for a
written law to be given as a remedy for human ignorance: because
"by the Law is the knowledge of sin" (Rm. 3:20). But, after man had
been instructed by the Law, his pride was convinced of his
weakness, through his being unable to fulfil what he knew. Hence, as
the Apostle concludes (Rm. 8:3,4), "what the Law could not do in that
it was weak through the flesh, God sent His own Son . . . that the
justification of the Law might be fulfilled in us."
With regard to good men, the Law was given to them as a help;
which was most needed by the people, at the time when the natural
law began to be obscured on account of the exuberance of sin: for it
was fitting that this help should be bestowed on men in an orderly
manner, so that they might be led from imperfection to perfection;
wherefore it was becoming that the Old Law should be given
between the law of nature and the law of grace.
Reply to Objection 1: It was not fitting for the Old Law to be given at
once after the sin of the first man: both because man was so
confident in his own reason, that he did not acknowledge his need of
the Old Law; because as yet the dictate of the natural law was not
darkened by habitual sinning.
Reply to Objection 2: A law should not be given save to the people,
since it is a general precept, as stated above (Question 90, Articles
2,3); wherefore at the time of Abraham God gave men certain
familiar, and, as it were, household precepts: but when Abraham's
descendants had multiplied, so as to form a people, and when they
had been freed from slavery, it was fitting that they should be given a
law; for "slaves are not that part of the people or state to which it is
fitting for the law to be directed," as the Philosopher says (Polit. iii,
2,4,5).
Reply to Objection 3: Since the Law had to be given to the people,
not only those, of whom Christ was born, received the Law, but the
whole people, who were marked with the seal of circumcision, which
was the sign of the promise made to Abraham, and in which he
believed, according to Rm. 4:11: hence even before David, the Law

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.7.

had to be given to that people as soon as they were collected
together.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.1.

## QUESTION 99 — OF THE PRECEPTS OF THE OLD LAW

Prologue
We must now consider the precepts of the Old Law; and (1) how they
are distinguished from one another; (2) each kind of precept. Under
the first head there are six points of inquiry:
(1) Whether the Old Law contains several precepts or only one?
(2) Whether the Old Law contains any moral precepts?
(3) Whether it contains ceremonial precepts in addition to the moral
precepts?
(4) Whether besides these it contains judicial precepts?
(5) Whether it contains any others besides these?
(6) How the Old Law induced men to keep its precepts.