is perennial and bubbles up unceasingly from uninterrupted springs, she thought
that this was the water meant. Wherefore He points out this more clearly by
speaking thus, and establishing by a comparison the superiority (of the water
which He would give). What then says He? "Whosoever shall drink of the Water
that I shall give him, shall never thirst." This and what was said next especially
showed the superiority, for material water possesses none of these qualities. And
what is it that follows? "It shall be in him a well of water springing up into
everlasting life." For as one that has a well within him could never be seized by
thirst, so neither can he that has this Water.
The woman straightway believed, showing herself much wiser than
Nicodemus, and not only wiser, but more manly. For he when he heard ten
thousand such things neither invited any others to this hearing, nor himself spoke
forth openly; but she exhibited the actions of an Apostle, preaching the Gospel to
all, and calling them to Jesus, and drawing a whole city forth to Him. Nicodemus
when he had heard said, "How can these things be?" And when Christ set before
him a clear illustration, that of "the wind," he did not even so receive the Word.
But the woman not so; at first she doubted, but afterwards receiving the Word
not by any regular demonstration, but in the form of an assertion, she
straightway hastened to embrace it. For when Christ said, "It shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting Life," immediately the woman says,

John 4:15
"Give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw."
Do you see how little by little she is led up to the highest doctrines? First
she thought Him some Jew who was transgressing the Law; then when He had
repelled that accusation, (for it was necessary that the person who was to teach
her such things should not be suspected,) having heard of "living water," she
supposed that this was spoken of material water; afterwards, having learned that
the words were spiritual, she believed that the water could remove the necessity
caused by thirst, but knew not yet what this could be; she still doubted, deeming
it indeed to be above material things, but not being exactly informed. But here
having gained a clearer insight, but not yet fully perceiving the whole, (for she
says, "Give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw,") she for
the time preferrs Him to Jacob. "For" (says she) "I need not this well if I receive
from you that water." Do you see how she sets Him before the Patriarch? This is
the act of a fairly-judging soul. She had shown how great an opinion she had of
Jacob, she saw One better than he, and was not held back by her prepossession.
Thus this woman was neither of an easy temper, (she did not carelessly receive
what was said, how can she have done so when she enquired with so great
exactness? ) nor yet disobedient, nor disputatious, and this she showed by her
petition. Yet to the Jews once He said, "Whosoever shall eat of My flesh shall
never hunger, and he that believes in Me shall never thirst" [John 6:35]; but they
not only did not believe, but were offended at Him. The woman had no such
feeling, she remains and petitions. To the Jews He said, "He that believes in Me
shall never thirst"; not so to the woman, but more grossly, "He that drinks of this
Water shall never thirst." For the promise referred to spiritual and unseen things.
Wherefore having raised her mind by His promises, He still lingers among
expressions relating to sense, because she could not as yet comprehend the exact
expression of spiritual things. Since had He said, "If you believe in Me you shall