SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.2.

Consequently we need to praise God with our lips, not indeed for His
sake, but for our own sake; since by praising Him our devotion is
aroused towards Him, according to Ps. 49:23: "The sacrifice of
praise shall glorify Me, and there is the way by which I will show him
the salvation of God." And forasmuch as man, by praising God,
ascends in his affections to God, by so much is he withdrawn from
things opposed to God, according to Is. 48:9, "For My praise I will
bridle thee lest thou shouldst perish." The praise of the lips is also
profitable to others by inciting their affections towards God,
wherefore it is written (Ps. 33:2): "His praise shall always be in my
mouth," and farther on: "Let the meek hear and rejoice. O magnify
the Lord with me."
Reply to Objection 1: We may speak of God in two ways. First, with
regard to His essence; and thus, since He is incomprehensible and
ineffable, He is above all praise. In this respect we owe Him
reverence and the honor of latria; wherefore Ps. 64:2 is rendered by
Jerome in his Psalter: "Praise to Thee is speechless, O God," as
regards the first, and as to the second, "A vow shall be paid to
Thee." Secondly, we may speak of God as to His effects which are
ordained for our good. In this respect we owe Him praise; wherefore
it is written (Is. 63:7): "I will remember the tender mercies of the Lord,
the praise of the Lord for all the things that the Lord hath bestowed
upon us." Again, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. 1): "Thou wilt find that
all the sacred hymns," i.e. divine praises "of the sacred writers, are
directed respectively to the Blessed Processions of the Thearchy," i.
e. of the Godhead, "showing forth and praising the names of God."
Reply to Objection 2: It profits one nothing to praise with the lips if
one praise not with the heart. For the heart speaks God's praises
when it fervently recalls "the glorious things of His works" [Ecclus.
17:7,8]. Yet the outward praise of the lips avails to arouse the inward
fervor of those who praise, and to incite others to praise God, as
stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: We praise God, not for His benefit, but for ours
as stated.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether God should be praised with song?

Objection 1: It would seem that God should not be praised with
song. For the Apostle says (Col. 3:16): "Teaching and admonishing
one another in psalms, hymns and spiritual canticles." Now we
should employ nothing in the divine worship, save what is delivered
to us on the authority of Scripture. Therefore it would seem that, in
praising God, we should employ, not corporal but spiritual canticles.
Objection 2: Further, Jerome in his commentary on Eph. 5:19,
"Singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord," says:
"Listen, young men whose duty it is to recite the office in church:
God is to be sung not with the voice but with the heart. Nor should
you, like play-actors, ease your throat and jaws with medicaments,
and make the church resound with theatrical measures and airs."
Therefore God should not be praised with song.
Objection 3: Further, the praise of God is competent to little and
great, according to Apoc. 14, "Give praise to our God, all ye His
servants; and you that fear Him, little and great." But the great, who
are in the church, ought not to sing: for Gregory says (Regist. iv, ep.
44): "I hereby ordain that in this See the ministers of the sacred altar
must not sing" (Cf. Decret., dist. xcii., cap. In sancta Romana
Ecclesia). Therefore singing is unsuitable to the divine praises.
Objection 4: Further, in the Old Law God was praised with musical
instruments and human song, according to Ps. 32:2,3: "Give praise
to the Lord on the harp, sing to Him with the psaltery, the instrument
of ten strings. Sing to Him a new canticle." But the Church does not
make use of musical instruments such as harps and psalteries, in
the divine praises, for fear of seeming to imitate the Jews. Therefore
in like manner neither should song be used in the divine praises.
Objection 5: Further, the praise of the heart is more important than
the praise of the lips. But the praise of the heart is hindered by
singing, both because the attention of the singers is distracted from
the consideration of what they are singing, so long as they give all
their attention to the chant, and because others are less able to
understand the thing that are sung than if they were recited without
chant. Therefore chants should not be employed in the divine
praises.