troubled, but say, "Blessed be God," we have found far more abundant riches.
For truly such great fruit you shall not reap by expending all your wealth on the
needy, by going about and seeking out the poor, and scattering your substance to
the hungry, as you shall gain by the same word. And so neither Job do I admire
so much in setting wide his house to the needy, as I am struck with and extol his
taking the spoiling of his substance thankfully. The same in the loss of children it
happens to see. For herein, also, reward no less than his who offered his son and
presented him in sacrifice shall you receive, if as you see yours die you shall
thank the God of love. For how shall such an one be less than Abraham? He saw
not his son stretched out a corpse, but only looked to do so. So if he gain in the
comparison by his purpose to slay and his stretching forth his hand to take the
knife, [Genesis 22:10] yet does he lose in that the child is lying dead here. And
besides, he had some comfort in the prospect of a good work done, and the
thought that this so excellent achievement was the work of his own fortitude, and
that the voice he heard came from above made him the readier. But here is no
such thing. So that he had need have a soul of adamant, who can bear with
calmness to see a child, his only one, brought up in affluence, in the dawn of fair
promise, lying upon the bier an outstretched corpse. And should such an one,
hushing to rest the heavings of nature, be strengthened to say the words of Job
without a tear, "The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away;" [Job 1:21] for those
words' sake alone, he shall stand with Abraham himself and with Job be
proclaimed a victor. And if, staying the wailings of the women and breaking up
the bands of mourners, he shall rouse them all to sing glory [to God], he shall
receive above, below, rewards unnumbered; men admiring, angels applauding,
God crowning him.
7. And do you say, How is it possible for one that is man not to mourn? I
reply, If you will reflect how neither the Patriarch nor Job, who both were men,
gave way to any thing of the kind; and this too in either case before the Law, and
Grace, and the excellent wisdom of the laws [we have]: if you will account that
the deceased has removed into a better country, and bounded away to a happier

inheritance, and that you have not lost your son but bestowed him henceforward
in an inviolable spot. Say not then, I pray you, I am no longer called "father," for
why are you no longer called so, when your son abides? For surely thou did not
part with your child nor lose your son? Rather you have gotten him, and hast him
in greater safety. Wherefore, no longer shall you be called "father" here only, but
also in heaven; so that you have not lost the title "father," but hast gained it in a
nobler sense; for henceforth you shall be called father not of a mortal child, but
of an immortal; of a noble soldier; on duty continually within [the palace]. For
think not because he is not present that therefore he is lost; for had he been
absent in a foreign land, the title of your relationship had not gone from you with
his body. Do not then gaze on the countenance of what lies there, for so thou
dost but kindle afresh your grief; but away with your thought from him that lies
there, up to heaven. That is not your child which is lying there, but he who has
flown away and sprung aloft into boundless height. When then you see the eyes
closed, the lips locked together, the body motionless, Oh be not these your
thoughts, "These lips no longer speak, these eyes no longer see, these feet no
longer walk, but are all on their way to corruption!" Oh say not so: but say the
reverse of this, These lips shall speak better, and the eyes see greater things, and
the feet shall mount upon the clouds; and this body which now rots away shall
put on immortality, and I shall receive my son back more glorious. But if what
you see distress you, say to yourself the while, This is [only] clothing and he has
put it off to receive it back more precious; this is an house and it is taken down
to be restored in greater splendor. For like as we, when purposing to take houses
down, allow not the inmates to stay, that they may escape the dust and noise; but
causing them to remove a little while, when we have built up the tenement
securely, admit them freely; so also does God; Who taking down this His
decaying tabernacle has received him the while into His paternal dwelling and
unto Himself, that when it has been taken down and built anew He may then
return it to him more glorious.
Say not then, "He is perished and shall no more be;" for these be the words