chain you to a treasure, commanding you to sit there perpetually, and to keep
watch for other people's goods, you are grieved, you are disgusted; and do you,
after you have bound yourself with most grievous chains, grieve when you are
delivered from the slavery? Truly sorrows and joys are [matters] of fancy. For
we guard them as if we had another's.
Now my discourse is for the women. A woman often has a garment woven
with gold, and this she shakes, wraps up in linen, keeps with care, trembles for it,
and has no enjoyment of it. For either she dies, or she becomes a widow. Or,
even if none of these things happen, yet from fear lest wearing it out by
continual use, she should deprive herself of it, she deprives herself of it in
another way, by sparing it. But she passes it on [you say] to another. But neither
is this clear: and even if she should pass it on, the other again will also use it in
the same way. And if any one will search their houses, he will find that the most
costly garments and other choice things, are tended with special honor, as if they
were living masters. For she does not use them habitually, but fears and
trembles, driving away moths and the other things that are wont to eat them, and
laying most of them in perfumes and spices, nor permitting all persons to be
counted worthy of the sight of them, but oftentimes carefully putting them in
order herself with her husband.
Tell me: did not Paul with reason call covetousness "idolatry"? [Colossians
3:5] For these show as great honor to their garments, their gold, as they to their
idols.
6. How long shall we stir up the mire? How long shall we be fixed to the
clay and the brickmaking? For as they toiled for the King of the Egyptians, so do
we also toil for the devil, and are scourged with far more grievous stripes. For by
how much the soul surpasses the body, by so much does anxiety the weals of
scourging. We are scourged every day, we are full of fear, in anxiety, in
trembling. But if we will groan, if we will look up to God, He sends to us, not
Moses, nor Aaron, but His own Word, and compunction. When this [word] has
come, and taken hold of our souls, He will free from the bitter slavery, He will

bring us forth out of Egypt, from unprofitable and vain zeal, from slavery which
brings no gain. For they indeed went forth after having at least received golden
[ornaments], the wages for building, but we [receive] nothing: and would it were
nothing. For indeed we also receive, not golden ornaments, but the evils of
Egypt, sins and chastisements and punishments.
Let us then learn to be made use of, let us learn to be spitefully treated; this
is the part of a Christian. Let us think lightly of golden raiment, let us think
lightly of money, that we may not think lightly of our salvation. Let us think
lightly of money and not think lightly of the soul. For this is chastised, this is
punished: those things remain here, but the soul departs yonder. Why, tell me, do
you cut yourself to pieces, without perceiving it?
7. These things I say to the overreaching. And it is well to say also to those
who are overreached. Bear their overreachings generously; they are ruining
themselves, not you. You indeed they defraud of your money, but they strip
themselves of the good will and help of God. And he that is stripped of that,
though he clothe himself with the whole wealth of the world, is of all men most
poor: and so he who is the poorest of all, if he have this, is the wealthiest of all.
For "the Lord" (it is said) "is my shepherd, and I shall lack nothing." [Psalm
23:1]
Tell me now, if you had had a husband, a great and admirable man, who
thoroughly loved you and cared for you, and then knew that he would live
always, and not die before you, and would give you all things to enjoy in
security, as your own: would you then have wished to possess anything? Even if
you had been stripped of all, would you not have thought yourself the richer for
this?
Why then do you grieve? Because you have no property? But consider that
you have had the occasion of sin taken away. But is it because you had
[property] and have been deprived of it? But you have acquired the good will of
God. And how have I acquired it (you say)? He has said, "Wherefore do ye not
rather suffer wrong?" [1 Corinthians 6:7] He has said, "Blessed are they who