1 Corinthians 13:13
"And now abides, faith, hope, love, these three; and the greatest of these is
love."
For faith indeed and hope, when the good things believed and hoped for
have come, cease. And to show this Paul said, "For hope that is seen is not hope;
for who hopes for that which he sees." Again, "Now faith is the assurance of
things hoped for, the proving of things not seen." [Romans 8:24; Hebrews 11:1]
So that these cease when those appear; but love is then most elevated, and
becomes more vehement. Another encomium of love. For neither is he content
with those before mentioned, but he strives to discover yet another. And observe:
he has said that it is a great gift, and a still more excellent way to these. He has
said, that without it there is no great profit in our gifts; he has shadowed out its
image at length; he intends again and in another manner to exalt it, and to show
that it is great from its abiding. Wherefore also he said, "But now abides faith,
hope, love, these three; but the greatest of these is love." How then is love the
greater? In that those pass away.
If now so great is the virtue of love, with good reason does he add and say,
"Follow after love." For there is surely need of "following," and a kind of
vehement running after her: in such sort does she fly from us, and so many are
the things which trip us up in that direction. Wherefore we have ever need of
great earnestness in order to overtake her. And to point out this, Paul said not,
"follow love," but, "pursue " her; stirring us up, and inflaming us to lay hold on
her.
For so God from the beginning contrived ten thousand ways for implanting
her in us. Thus, first, He granted one head to all, Adam. For why do we not all
spring out of the earth? Why not full grown, as he was? In order that both the
birth and the bringings up of children, and the being born of another, might bind

us mutually together. For this cause neither made He woman out of the earth:
and because the thing of the same substance was not equally sufficient to shame
us into unanimity, unless we had also the same progenitor, He provided also for
this: since, if now, being only separated by place, we consider ourselves alien
from one another; much more would this have happened if our race had had two
originals. For this cause therefore, as it were from some one head, he bound
together the whole body of the human race. And because from the beginning
they seemed to be in a manner two, see how he fastens them together again, and
gathers them into one by marriage. For, "therefore," says He, "shall a man leave
his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be for
one flesh." [Genesis 2:24 ] And he said not, "the woman," but, "the man,"
because the desire too is stronger in him. Yea, and for this cause He made it also
stronger, that it might bow the superior party to the absolute sway of this
passion, and might subjugate it to the weaker. And since marriage also must
needs be introduced, him from whom she sprang He made husband to the
woman. For all things in the eye of God are second to love. And if when things
had thus begun, the first man straightway became so frantic, and the devil sowed
among them so great warfare and envy; what would he not have done, had they
not sprung from one root?
Further, in order that the one might be subject, and the other rule; (for
equality is wont oftentimes to bring in strife;) he suffered it not to be a
democracy, but a monarchy; and as in an army, this order one may see in every
family. In the rank of monarch, for instance, there is the husband; but in the rank
of lieutenant and general, the wife; and the children too are allotted a third
station in command. Then after these a fourth order, that of the servant. For these
also bear rule over their inferiors, and some one of them is oftentimes set over
the whole, keeping ever the post of the master, but still as a servant. And
together with this again another command, and among the children themselves
again another, according to their age and sex; since among the children the
female does not possess equal sway. And every where has God made