transgressed, because the woman was in the transgression. Let her not however
grieve. God has given her no small consolation, that of childbearing. And if it be
said that this is of nature, so is that also of nature; for not only that which is of
nature has been granted, but also the bringing up of children. "If they continue in
faith and charity and holiness with sobriety"; that is, if after childbearing, they
keep them in charity and purity. By these means they will have no small reward
on their account, because they have trained up wrestlers for the service of Christ.
By holiness he means good life, modesty, and sobriety.
Chap. iii. ver. 1. "This is a faithful saying."
This relates to the present subject, not to what follows, respecting the office
of a Bishop. For as it was doubted, he affirms it to be a true saying, that fathers
may be benefited by the virtue of their children, and mothers also, when they
have brought them up well. But what if she be herself addicted to wickedness
and vice? Will she then be benefited by the bringing up of children? Is it not
probable that she will bring them up to be like herself? It is not therefore of any
woman, but of the virtuous woman, that it is said she shall receive a great
recompense for this also.
Moral. Hear this, you fathers and mothers, that your bringing up of children
shall not lose its reward. This also he says, as he proceeds, "Well reported of for
good works; if she have brought up children." [1 Timothy 5:10] Among other
commendations he reckons this one, for it is no light praise to devote to God
those children which are given them of God. For if the basis, the foundation
which they lay be good, great will be their reward; as great, if they neglect it,
will be their punishment. It was on account of his children that Eli perished. For
he ought to have admonished them, and indeed he did admonish them, but not as
he ought; but from his unwillingness to give them pain he destroyed both
himself and them. Hear this, you fathers, bring your children up with great care
"in the nurture and admonition of the Lord." [Ephesians 6:4] Youth is wild, and
requires many governors, teachers, directors, attendants, and tutors; and after all
these, it is a happiness if it be restrained. For as a horse not broken in, or a wild

beast untamed, such is youth. But if from the beginning, from the earliest age,
we fix it in good rules, much pains will not be required afterwards; for good
habits formed will be to them as a law. Let us not suffer them to do anything
which is agreeable, but injurious; nor let us indulge them, as forsooth but
children. Especially let us train them in chastity, for there is the very bane of
youth. For this many struggles, much attention will be necessary. Let us take
wives for them early, so that their brides may receive their bodies pure and
unpolluted, so their loves will be more ardent. He that is chaste before marriage,
much more will he be chaste after it; and he that practiced fornication before,
will practice it after marriage. "All bread," it is said, "is sweet to the fornicator."
[Sirach 23:17] Garlands are wont to be worn on the heads of bridegrooms, as a
symbol of victory, betokening that they approach the marriage bed unconquered
by pleasure. But if captivated by pleasure he has given himself up to harlots,
why does he wear the garland, since he has been subdued?
Let us admonish them of these things. Let us employ sometimes advice,
sometimes warnings, sometimes threatening. In children we have a great charge
committed to us. Let us bestow great care upon them, and do everything that the
Evil One may not rob us of them. But now our practice is the very reverse of
this. We take all care indeed to have our farm in good order, and to commit it to
a faithful manager, we look out for it an ass-driver, and muleteer, and bailiff, and
a clever accomptant. But we do not look out for what is much more important,
for a person to whom we may commit our son as the guardian of his morals,
though this is a possession much more valuable than all others. It is for him
indeed that we take such care of our estate. We take care of our possessions for
our children, but of the children themselves we take no care at all. What an
absurdity is this! Form the soul of your son aright, and all the rest will be added
hereafter. If that is not good, he will derive no advantage from his wealth, and if
it is formed to goodness he will suffer no harm from poverty. Would you leave
him rich? Teach him to be good: for so he will be able to acquire wealth, or if
not, he will not fare worse than they who possess it. But if he be wicked, though