mortal and fleshly, we handle things visible more easily and more
familiarly than things intelligible; since the former are outward, the latter
inward; and the former are perceived by the bodily sense, the latter are
understood by the mind; and we ourselves, i.e. our minds, are not
sensible things, that is, bodies, but intelligible things, since we are life.
And yet, as I said, we are so familiarly occupied with bodies, and our
thought has projected itself outwardly with so wonderful a proclivity
towards bodies, that, when it has been withdrawn from the uncertainty of
things corporeal, that it may be fixed with a much more certain and stable
knowledge in that which is spirit, it flies back to those bodies, and seeks
rest there whence it has drawn weakness. And to this its feebleness we
must suit our argument; so that, if we would endeavor at any time to
distinguish more aptly, and intimate more readily, the inward spiritual
thing, we must take examples of likenesses from outward things
pertaining to the body. The outer man, then, endued as he is with the
bodily sense, is conversant with bodies. And this bodily sense, as is easily
observed, is fivefold; seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. But it is
both a good deal of trouble, and is not necessary, that we should inquire
of all these five senses about that which we seek. For that which one of
them declares to us, holds also good in the rest. Let us use, then,
principally the testimony of the eyes. For this bodily sense far surpasses
the rest; and in proportion to its difference of kind, is nearer to the sight
of the mind.

### CHAP. 2.—A CERTAIN TRINITY IN THE SIGHT. THAT THERE ARE THREE THINGS IN SIGHT, WHICH DIFFER IN THEIR OWN NATURE. IN WHAT MANNER FROM A VISIBLE THING VISION IS PRODUCED, OR THE IMAGE OF THAT THING WHICH IS SEEN. THE MATTER IS SHOWN MORE CLEARLY BY AN EXAMPLE. HOW THESE THREE COMBINE IN ONE.

2. When, then, we see any corporeal object, these three things, as is most
easy to do, are to be considered and distinguished: First, the object itself
which we see; whether a stone, or flame, or any other thing that can be
seen by the eyes; and this certainly might exist also already before it was
seen; next, vision or the act of seeing, which did not exist before we
perceived the object itself which is presented to the sense; in the third

place, that which keeps the sense of the eye in the object seen, so long as
it is seen, viz. the attention of the mind. In these three, then, not only is
there an evident distinction, but also a diverse nature. For, first, that
visible body is of a far different nature from the sense of the eyes, through
the incidence of which sense upon it vision arises. And what plainly is
vision itself other than perception informed by that thing which is
perceived? Although there is no vision if the visible object be withdrawn,
nor could there be any vision of the kind at all if there were no body that
could be seen; yet the body by which the sense of the eyes is informed,
when that body is seen, and the form itself which is imprinted by it upon
the sense, which is called vision, are by no means of the same substance.
For the body that is seen is, in its own nature, separable; but the sense,
which was already in the living subject, even before it saw what it was
able to see, when it fell in with something visible,—or the vision which
comes to be in the sense from the visible body when now brought into
connection with it and seen,—the sense, then, I say, or the vision, that is,
the sense informed from without, belongs to the nature of the living
subject, which is altogether other than that body which we perceive by
seeing, and by which the sense is not so formed as to be sense, but as to
be vision. For unless the sense were also in us before the presentation to
us of the sensible object, we should not differ from the blind, at times
when we are seeing nothing, whether in darkness, or when our eyes are
closed. But we differ from them in this, that there is in us, even when we
are not seeing, that whereby we are able to see, which is called the sense;
whereas this is not in them, nor are they called blind for any other reason
than because they have it not. Further also, that attention of the mind
which keeps the sense in that thing which we see, and connects both, not
only differs from that visible thing in its nature; in that the one is mind,
and the other body; but also from the sense and the vision itself: since
this attention is the act of the mind alone; but the sense of the eyes is
called a bodily sense, for no other reason than because the eyes
themselves also are members of the body; and although an inanimate
body does not perceive, yet the soul commingled with the body perceives
through a corporeal instrument, and that instrument is called sense. And
this sense, too, is cut off and extinguished by suffering on the part of the
body, when any one is blinded; while the mind remains the same; and its
attention, since the eyes are lost, has not, indeed, the sense of the body