justice: and this work of satisfaction can be equal to the one debt
without being equal to the other, for the debts of two sinners require
a greater satisfaction than the debt of one. Secondly, it may be
considered as meriting eternal life, and this it has as proceeding
from its root, which is charity: and in this way it profits not only the
person for whom it is done, but also and still more the doer.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections: for the first
considered the work of suffrage as a work of satisfaction, while the
others consider it as meritorious.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether suffrages profit those who are in hell?

Objection 1: It would seem that suffrages profit those who are in hell.
For it is written (2 Macc. 12:40): "They found under the coats of the
slain some of the donaries of the idols . . . which the law forbiddeth
to the Jews," and yet we read further on (2 Macc. 12:43) that Judas
"sent twelve thousand drachms of silver to Jerusalem . . . to be
offered for the sins of the dead." Now it is clear that they sinned
mortally through acting against the Law, and consequently that they
died in mortal sin, and were taken to hell. Therefore suffrages profit
those who are in hell.
Objection 2: Further, the text (Sent. iv, D, 45) quotes the saying of
Augustine (Enchiridion cx) that "those whom suffrages profit gain
either entire forgiveness, or at least an abatement of their
damnation." Now only those who are in hell are said to be damned.
Therefore suffrages profit even those who are in hell.
Objection 3: Further, Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier.): "If here the prayers
of the righteous avail those who are alive, how much more do they,
after death, profit those alone who are worthy of their holy prayers?"
Hence we may gather that suffrages are more profitable to the dead
than to the living. Now they profit the living even though they be in
mortal sin, for the Church prays daily for sinners that they be
converted to God. Therefore suffrages avail also for the dead who
are in mortal sin.
Objection 4: Further, in the Lives of the Fathers (iii, 172; vi, 3) we
read, and the Damascene relates in his sermon [De his qui in fide
dormierunt] that Macarius discovered the skull of a dead man on the
road, and that after praying he asked whose head it was, and the
head replied that it had belonged to a pagan priest who was
condemned to hell; and yet he confessed that he and others were
assisted by the prayers of Macarius. Therefore the suffrages of the
Church profit even those who are in hell.
Objection 5: Further, the Damascene in the same sermon relates that
Gregory, while praying for Trajan, heard a voice from heaven saying
to him: "I have heard thy voice, and I pardon Trajan": and of this fact
the Damascene adds in the same sermon, "the whole East and West
are witnesses." Yet it is clear that Trajan was in hell, since "he put