defects; whether we have washed away our sins? It is common for every one to
ask in Lent, how many weeks each has fasted; and some may be heard saying
that they have fasted two, others three, and others that they have fasted the whole
of the weeks. But what advantage is it, if we have gone through the fast devoid
of good works? If another says, "I have fasted the whole of Lent," do thou say, "I
had an enemy, but I was reconciled; I had a custom of evil-speaking, but I put a
stop to it; I had a custom of swearing, but I have broken through this evil
practice." It is of no advantage to merchants, to have gone over a great extent of
ocean, but to have sailed with a freight and much merchandise. The fast will
profit us nothing, if we pass through it as a mere matter of course, without any
result. If we practise a mere abstinence from meats, when the forty days are past,
the fast is over too. But if we abstain from sins, this still remains, even when the
fast has gone by, and will be from this time a continual advantage to us; and will
here render us no small recompense, before we attain unto the kingdom of
heaven. For as he who is living in iniquity, even before hell, has punishment,
being stung by his conscience; so the man who is rich in good works, even
before the kingdom, will have the benefit of exceeding joy, in that he is
nourished with blessed hopes.
14. Therefore Christ says, "I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you." [John 16:22] A brief saying, but
one that has in it much consolation. What then is this, "your joy no man takes?"
if you have money, many are able to take away the joy that comes of your
wealth; as, for instance, a thief, by digging through the wall; a servant by
carrying off what was entrusted to him; an emperor by confiscation; and the
envious man by contumely. Should you possess power, there are many who are
able to deprive you of the joy of it. For when the conditions of office are at an
end, the conditions of pleasure will also be ended. And in the exercise of office
itself too, there are many accidents occurring, which by bringing difficulty and
care, strike at the root of your satisfaction. If you have bodily strength, the
assaults of disease put a stop to joy from that source. If you have beauty and

bloom, the approach of old age withers it, and takes away that joy. Or if you
enjoy a sumptuous table, when evening comes on the joy of the banquet is at an
end; for every thing belonging to this life is liable to damage, and is unable to
afford us a lasting pleasure; but piety and the virtue of the soul is altogether the
reverse of this. If you have done an alms, no one is able to take away this good
work. Though an army, or kings, or myriads of calumniators and conspirators,
were to beset you on all sides, they could not take away the possession, once
deposited in heaven; but the joy thereof continually abides; for it is said, "He has
dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever." And
very justly; for in the storehouses of heaven it is laid up, where no thief breaks
in, nor robber seizes, nor moth devours. If you pour out continued and fervent
prayers, no man will be able to spoil you of the fruit of them; for this fruit too is
rooted in the heavens; it is out of the way of all injury, and remains beyond
mortal reach. If when evil-treated you have done a kind action; if you have borne
with patience to hear yourself evil spoken of; if you have returned blessings for
reproaches; these are good works that abide continually, and the joy of them no
man takes away; but as often as you remember these, you are glad and rejoicest,
and reapest large fruits of pleasure. So also, indeed, if we succeed in avoiding
oaths; and persuade our tongue to abstain from this pernicious practice, the good
work will be finished in a short time, but the delight arising from it will be
continuous and unfailing.
15. And now, it is time that you should be teachers and guides of others;
that friends should undertake to instruct and lead on their neighbours; servants
their fellow-servants; and youths those of their own age. What if any one had
promised you a single piece of gold for every man who was reformed, would
you not then have used every exertion, and been all day long sitting by them,
persuading and exhorting. Yet now God promises you not one piece of gold, nor
ten, or twenty, or a hundred, or a thousand; no, nor the whole earth, for your
labours, but He gives you that which is greater than all the world, the kingdom
of heaven; and not only this, but also another thing besides it. And what kind of