THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.4.

twofold baptism of penance may be understood. one is that which
John conferred by baptizing, which is called "a baptism of penance,"
etc., by reason of its inducing men to do penance, and of its being a
kind of protestation by which men avowed their purpose of doing
penance. The other is the baptism of Christ, by which sins are
remitted, and which John could not give, but only preach, saying:
"He will baptize you in the Holy Ghost."
Or it may be said that he preached the "baptism of penance," i.e.
which induced men to do penance, which penance leads men on to
"the remission of sins."
Or again, it may be said with Jerome that "by the baptism of Christ
grace is given, by which sins are remitted gratis; and that what is
accomplished by the bridegroom is begun by the bridesman," i.e. by
John. Consequently it is said that "he baptized and preached the
baptism of penance unto remission of sins," not as though he
accomplished this himself, but because he began it by preparing the
way for it.
Reply to Objection 2: That confession of sins was not made unto the
remission of sins, to be realized immediately through the baptism of
John, but to be obtained through subsequent penance and through
the baptism of Christ, for which that penance was a preparation.
Reply to Objection 3: Circumcision was instituted as a remedy for
original sin. Whereas the baptism of John was not instituted for this
purpose, but was merely in preparation for the baptism of Christ, as
stated above; whereas the sacraments attain their effect through the
force of their institution.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ alone should have been baptized

with the baptism of John?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ alone should have been
baptized with the baptism of John. For, as stated above (Article 1),
"the reason why John baptized was that Christ might receive
baptism," as Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. xiii). But what is
proper to Christ should not be applicable to others. Therefore no
others should have received that baptism.
Objection 2: Further, whoever is baptized either receives something
from the baptism or confers something on the baptism. But no one
could receive anything from the baptism of John, because thereby
grace was not conferred, as stated above (Article 3). On the other
hand, no one could confer anything on baptism save Christ, who
"sanctified the waters by the touch of His most pure flesh" [Mag.
Sent. iv, 3]. Therefore it seems that Christ alone should have been
baptized with the baptism of John.
Objection 3: Further, if others were baptized with that baptism, this
was only in order that they might be prepared for the baptism of
Christ: and thus it would seem fitting that the baptism of John
should be conferred on all, old and young, Gentile and Jew, just as
the baptism of Christ. But we do not read that either children or
Gentiles were baptized by the latter; for it is written (Mk. 1:5) that
"there went out to him . . . all they of Jerusalem, and were baptized
by him." Therefore it seems that Christ alone should have been
baptized by John.
On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 3:21): "It came to pass, when all the
people were baptized, that Jesus also being baptized and praying,
heaven was opened."
I answer that, For two reasons it behooved others besides Christ to
be baptized with the baptism of John. First, as Augustine says
(Super Joan., Tract. iv, v), "if Christ alone had been baptized with the
baptism of John, some would have said that John's baptism, with
which Christ was baptized, was more excellent than that of Christ,
with which others are baptized."
Secondly, because, as above stated, it behooved others to be