SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.181, C.3.

Reply to Objection 3: A sacrifice is rendered to God spiritually when
something is offered to Him; and of all man's goods, God specially
accepts that of the human soul when it is offered to Him in sacrifice.
Now a man ought to offer to God, in the first place, his soul,
according to Ecclus. 30:24, "Have pity on thy own soul, pleasing
God"; in the second place, the souls of others, according to Apoc.
22:17, "He that heareth, let him say: Come." And the more closely a
man unites his own or another's soul to God, the more acceptable is
his sacrifice to God; wherefore it is more acceptable to God that one
apply one's own soul and the souls of others to contemplation than
to action. Consequently the statement that "no sacrifice is more
acceptable to God than zeal for souls," does not mean that the merit
of the active life is preferable to the merit of the contemplative life,
but that it is more meritorious to offer to God one's own soul and the
souls of others, than any other external gifts.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.181, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the contemplative life is hindered by the

active life?
Objection 1: It would seem that the contemplative life is hindered by
the active life. For the contemplative life requires a certain stillness
of mind, according to Ps. 45:11, "Be still, and see that I am God";
whereas the active life involves restlessness, according to Lk. 10:41,
"Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things."
Therefore the active life hinders the contemplative.
Objection 2: Further, clearness of vision is a requisite for the
contemplative life. Now active life is a hindrance to clear vision; for
Gregory says (Hom. xiv in Ezech.) that it "is blear-eyed and fruitful,
because the active life, being occupied with work, sees less."
Therefore the active life hinders the contemplative.
Objection 3: Further, one contrary hinders the other. Now the active
and the contemplative life are apparently contrary to one another,
since the active life is busy about many things, while the
contemplative life attends to the contemplation of one; wherefore
they differ in opposition to one another. Therefore it would seem that
the contemplative life is hindered by the active.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. vi, 37): "Those who wish to
hold the fortress of contemplation, must first of all train in the camp
of action."
I answer that, The active life may be considered from two points of
view. First, as regards the attention to and practice of external
works: and thus it is evident that the active life hinders the
contemplative, in so far as it is impossible for one to be busy with
external action, and at the same time give oneself to Divine
contemplation. Secondly, active life may be considered as quieting
and directing the internal passions of the soul; and from this point of
view the active life is a help to the contemplative, since the latter is
hindered by the inordinateness of the internal passions. Hence
Gregory says (Moral. vi, 37): "Those who wish to hold the fortress of
contemplation must first of all train in the camp of action. Thus after
careful study they will learn whether they no longer wrong their
neighbor, whether they bear with equanimity the wrongs their
neighbors do to them, whether their soul is neither overcome with