me, if your servants were disputing with each other, and exchanging assurances
with each other, and the fellow-servant should declare that for his part he would
not be satisfied till he had their common master given him for surety, would he
not have stripes given him without number, and be made to know that the master
is for other purposes, and not to be put to any such use as this? Why do I speak
of a fellow-servant? For should he choose any respectable person, would not that
person consider it an affront? But I do not wish to do this, say you. Well: then do
not compel the other to do so either: since where men only are in question, this is
done— if your party says, "I give such an one as my surety," you do not allow
him. "What then," say you, "am I to lose what I have given?" I am not speaking
of this; but that you allow him to insult God. For which reason greater shall be
the inevitable punishment to him who forces the oath upon another, than to him
who takes it: the same holds with regard to him who gives an oath when no one
asks him. And what makes it worse, is, that every one is ready to swear, for one
farthing, for some petty item, for his own injustice. All this may be said, when
there is no perjury; but if perjury follow in the train, both he that imposes and he
that takes the oath have turned everything upside down. "But there are some
things," you will say, "which are unknown." Well take these into account, and do
nothing negligently; but, if you do act negligently, take the loss to yourself as
your punishment. It is better to be the loser thus, than in a very different way. For
tell me— you force a man to take an oath, with what expectation? That he will
forswear himself? But this is utter insanity; and the judgment will fall upon your
own head; better you should lose your money, than he be lost. Why act thus to
your own detriment, and to the insulting of God? This is the spirit of a wild
beast, and of an impious man. But you do this in the expectation that he will not
forswear himself? Then trust him without the oath. "Nay, there are many," you
reply, "who in the absence of an oath would presume to defraud; but, once the
oath taken, would refrain." You deceive yourself, man. A man having once
learned to steal, and to wrong his neighbor, will presume full oft to trample upon
his oath; if on the contrary he shrinks from swearing, he will much more shrink

from injustice. "But he is influenced against his will." Well then, he deserves
pardon.
But why am I speaking of this kind of oaths, while I pass over those in the
market-place? For as regards these last, you can urge none of these pleas. For ten
farthings you there have swearing and forswearing. In fact, because the
thunderbolt does not actually fall from heaven, because all things are not
overthrown, you stand holding God in your bonds: to get a few vegetables, a pair
of shoes, for a little matter of money, calling Him to witness. What is the
meaning of this? Do not let us imagine, that because we are not punished,
therefore we do not sin; this comes of God's mercy; not of our merit. Let your
oath be an imprecation upon your own child, upon your own self: say, "Else let
the hangman lash my ribs." But you dare not. Is God less valuable than your
ribs? Is He less precious than your pate? Say "Else let me be struck blind." But
no. Christ so spares us, that He will not let us swear even by our own head; and
yet we so little spare the honor of God, that on all occasions we must drag Him
in! You know not what God is, and with what sort of lips he behooves to be
invoked. Why, when we speak of any man of eminent worth, we say, "First wash
your mouth, and then make mention of him:" and yet, that precious Name which
is above every name, the Name which is marvellous in all the earth, the Name
which devils hear and tremble, we haul about as we list! Oh! The force of habit!
Thereby has that Name become cheap. No doubt, if you impose on any one the
necessity of coming into the sacred edifice to take his oath there, you feel that
you have made the oath an awful one. And yet how is it that it seems awful in
this way, but because we have been in the habit of using that at random, but not
this? For ought not a shudder of awe to be felt when God is but named? But now,
whereas among the Jews His Name was held to be so reverend, that it was
written upon plates, and none was allowed to wear the characters except the
high-priest alone: we bandy about His Name like any ordinary word. If simply to
name God was not allowed to all; to call Him to witness, what audacity is it! nay,
what madness! For if need were (rather than this) to fling away all that you have,