SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether, in trading, it is lawful to sell a thing at a

higher price than what was paid for it?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful, in trading, to sell a
thing for a higher price than we paid for it. For Chrysostom [Hom.
xxxviii in the Opus Imperfectum, falsely ascribed to St. John
Chrysostom] says on Mt. 21:12: "He that buys a thing in order that he
may sell it, entire and unchanged, at a profit, is the trader who is cast
out of God's temple." Cassiodorus speaks in the same sense in his
commentary on Ps. 70:15, "Because I have not known learning, or
trading" according to another version [The Septuagint]: "What is
trade," says he, "but buying at a cheap price with the purpose of
retailing at a higher price?" and he adds: "Such were the tradesmen
whom Our Lord cast out of the temple." Now no man is cast out of
the temple except for a sin. Therefore such like trading is sinful.
Objection 2: Further, it is contrary to justice to sell goods at a higher
price than their worth, or to buy them for less than their value, as
shown above (Article 1). Now if you sell a thing for a higher price
than you paid for it, you must either have bought it for less than its
value, or sell it for more than its value. Therefore this cannot be done
without sin.
Objection 3: Further, Jerome says (Ep. ad Nepot. lii): "Shun, as you
would the plague, a cleric who from being poor has become wealthy,
or who, from being a nobody has become a celebrity." Now trading
would net seem to be forbidden to clerics except on account of its
sinfulness. Therefore it is a sin in trading, to buy at a low price and
to sell at a higher price.
On the contrary, Augustine commenting on Ps. 70:15, "Because I
have not known learning," [Obj 1] says: "The greedy tradesman
blasphemes over his losses; he lies and perjures himself over the
price of his wares. But these are vices of the man, not of the craft,
which can be exercised without these vices." Therefore trading is not
in itself unlawful.
I answer that, A tradesman is one whose business consists in the
exchange of things. According to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 3),
exchange of things is twofold; one, natural as it were, and
necessary, whereby one commodity is exchanged for another, or

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.5.

money taken in exchange for a commodity, in order to satisfy the
needs of life. Such like trading, properly speaking, does not belong
to tradesmen, but rather to housekeepers or civil servants who have
to provide the household or the state with the necessaries of life.
The other kind of exchange is either that of money for money, or of
any commodity for money, not on account of the necessities of life,
but for profit, and this kind of exchange, properly speaking, regards
tradesmen, according to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 3). The former kind
of exchange is commendable because it supplies a natural need: but
the latter is justly deserving of blame, because, considered in itself,
it satisfies the greed for gain, which knows no limit and tends to
infinity. Hence trading, considered in itself, has a certain
debasement attaching thereto, in so far as, by its very nature, it does
not imply a virtuous or necessary end. Nevertheless gain which is
the end of trading, though not implying, by its nature, anything
virtuous or necessary, does not, in itself, connote anything sinful or
contrary to virtue: wherefore nothing prevents gain from being
directed to some necessary or even virtuous end, and thus trading
becomes lawful. Thus, for instance, a man may intend the moderate
gain which he seeks to acquire by trading for the upkeep of his
household, or for the assistance of the needy: or again, a man may
take to trade for some public advantage, for instance, lest his
country lack the necessaries of life, and seek gain, not as an end, but
as payment for his labor.
Reply to Objection 1: The saying of Chrysostom refers to the trading
which seeks gain as a last end. This is especially the case where a
man sells something at a higher price without its undergoing any
change. For if he sells at a higher price something that has changed
for the better, he would seem to receive the reward of his labor.
Nevertheless the gain itself may be lawfully intended, not as a last
end, but for the sake of some other end which is necessary or
virtuous, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Not everyone that sells at a higher price than
he bought is a tradesman, but only he who buys that he may sell at a
profit. If, on the contrary, he buys not for sale but for possession,
and afterwards, for some reason wishes to sell, it is not a trade
transaction even if he sell at a profit. For he may lawfully do this,
either because he has bettered the thing, or because the value of the
thing has changed with the change of place or time, or on account of
the danger he incurs in transferring the thing from one place to
another, or again in having it carried by another. In this sense neither