be necessary to take an oath?" Where there is a transgression of the law, there is
no such thing as necessity. "Is it possible then," it is replied, "not to swear at
all?" What do you say? Hath God commanded, and do you dare to ask if it be
possible for His law to be kept? Why, truly it is a thing impossible that His law
should not be kept; and I am desirous to persuade you from present
circumstances of this; that so far from its being impossible not to swear, it is
impossible to swear. For behold, the inhabitants of the city were commanded to
bring in a payment of gold, such as it might have seemed beyond the power of
many to do; yet the greater part of the sum has been collected; and you may hear
the tax gatherers saying, "Why delay, man? Why put us off from day to day? It is
not possible to avoid it. It is the law of the Emperor, which admits of no delay."
What do you say, I ask? The Emperor has commanded you to bring in your
money, and it is impossible not to bring it in! God has commanded you to avoid
oaths! And how do you say, it is impossible to avoid them!
7. I am now for the sixth day admonishing you in respect of this precept.
Henceforth, I am desirous to take leave of you, meaning to abstain from the
subject, that you may be on your guard. There will no longer be any excuse or
allowance for you; for of right, indeed, if nothing had been said on this matter, it
ought to have been amended of yourselves, for it is not a thing of an intricate
nature, or that requires great preparation. But since you have enjoyed the
advantage of so much admonition and counsel, what excuse will you have to
offer, when you stand accused before that dread tribunal, and are required to give
account of this transgression. It is impossible to invent any excuse; but of
necessity you must either go hence amended, or, if you have not amended, be
punished, and abide the extremest penalty! Thinking, therefore, upon all these
things, and departing hence with much anxiety about them, exhort ye one
another, that the things spoken of during so many days may be kept with all
watchfulness in your minds, so that while we are silent, you instructing,
edifying, exhorting one another, may exhibit great improvement; and having
fulfilled all the other precepts, may enjoy eternal crowns; which God grant we

may all obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom and with whom be glory, to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 9 on the Statues
Commendation of those who had laid aside the practice of swearing. It
is shown that no one need scruple about hearing the divine oracles in the
Church after a meal. Answer to the question, Why it was so long before the
Holy Scriptures were given? Comment on the passage, "The heavens declare
the glory of God," with a description of the natural world. And finally, an
admonition against swearing.
1. It was but lately that I spoke to you as I do now to you again! And O that
I could be always with you—yea, rather am I always with you, though not by
bodily presence, yet by the power of love! For I have no other life but you, and
the care of your salvation. As the husbandman has no other anxiety, but about his
seeds and his harvests; and the pilot about the waves and the harbours; so the
preacher is anxious with respect to his auditors and their progress, even as I am
at the present time! Wherefore I bear you all upon my mind, not only here, but
also at home. For if the multitude be great, and the measure of my heart be
narrow, yet love is wide; and "you are not straitened in us." I will not add what
follows next, for neither are we straitened with you. Whence is this apparent?
Because I have met with many who have said, "We have performed the precept,
by making rules for each other, defining penalties for those who swear, and
enforcing punishment upon those who transgress this law." A punishment which
is indeed well becoming you, and which is a sign of the greatest charity. For I am
not ashamed of making myself busy in these matters, since this love of
interference does not proceed from idle curiosity but from tender care. For if it
be no reproach to the physician to make enquiry concerning the patient, neither
is it any fault in us to be ever asking about your salvation; since thus being
informed what has been accomplished, and what has been left undone, we shall
be able to apply the further remedies with the requisite knowledge. These things