Demiurge, if, as some venture to maintain, he had already begun to be a spectator and a hearer
of those mysteries which are affirmed to be above the Demiurge? For if it is true that he was
becoming acquainted with that order of things which is above the Demiurge, he would by no means
have remained in the regions of the Demiurge, and that so as not even thoroughly to explore even
these (for, according to their manner of speaking, there still lay before him four heavens, if he
were to approach the Demiurge, and thus behold the whole seven lying beneath him); but he might
have been admitted, perhaps, into the intermediate place, that is, into the presence of the Mother,
that he might receive instruction from her as to the things within the Pleroma. For that inner man
which was in him, and spoke in him, as they say, though invisible, could have attained not only to
the third heaven, but even as far as the presence of their Mother. For if they maintain that they
themselves, that is, their [inner] man, at once ascends above the Demiurge, and departs to the
Mother, much more must this have occurred to the [inner] man of the apostle; for the Demiurge
would not have hindered him, being, as they assert, himself already subject to the Saviour. But if
he had tried to hinder him, the effort would have gone for nothing. For it is not possible that he
should prove stronger than the providence of the Father, and that when the inner man is said to be
invisible even to the Demiurge. But since he (Paul) has described that assumption of himself up to
the third heaven as something great and pre-eminent, it cannot be that these men ascend above the
seventh heaven, for they are certainly not superior to the apostle. If they do maintain that they are
more excellent than he, let them prove themselves so by their works, for they have never pretended
to anything like [what he describes as occurring to himself]. And for this reason he added, "Whether
in the body, or whether out of the body, God knoweth," that the body might neither be thought
to be a partaker in that vision, as if it could have participated in those things which it had seen
and heard; nor, again, that any one should say that he was not carried higher on account of the
weight of the body; but it is therefore thus far permitted even without the body to behold spiritual
mysteries which are the operations of God, who made the heavens and the earth, and formed man,
and placed him in paradise, so that those should be spectators of them who, like the apostle, have
reached a high degree of perfection in the love of God.

This is an exceedingly obscure and difficult sentence. Grabe and some of the later editors read, "uti neque non corpus,"
thus making Irenæus affirm that the body did participate in the vision. But Massuet contends strenuously that this is contrary to
the author's purpose, as wishing to maintain, against a possible exception of the Valentinians, that Paul then witnessed spiritual
realities, and by omitting this "non" before "corpus," makes Irenæus deny that the body was a partaker in the vision. The point
can only be doubtfully decided, but Massuet's ingenious note inclines us to his side of the question.