FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.9.

grace falls under condign merit.
Reply to Objection 1: Reward is the term of merit. But there is a
double term of movement, viz. the last, and the intermediate, which
is both beginning and term; and this term is the reward of increase.
Now the reward of human favor is as the last end to those who place
their end in it; hence such as these receive no other reward.
Reply to Objection 2: The increase of grace is not above the virtuality
of the pre-existing grace, although it is above its quantity, even as a
tree is not above the virtuality of the seed, although above its
quantity.
Reply to Objection 3: By every meritorious act a man merits the
increase of grace, equally with the consummation of grace which is
eternal life. But just as eternal life is not given at once, but in its own
time, so neither is grace increased at once, but in its own time, viz.
when a man is sufficiently disposed for the increase of grace.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether a man may merit perseverance?

Objection 1: It would seem that anyone may merit perseverance. For
what a man obtains by asking, can come under the merit of anyone
that is in grace. Now men obtain perseverance by asking it of God;
otherwise it would be useless to ask it of God in the petitions of the
Lord's Prayer, as Augustine says (De Dono Persev. ii). Therefore
perseverance may come under the merit of whoever has grace.
Objection 2: Further, it is more not to be able to sin than not to sin.
But not to be able to sin comes under merit, for we merit eternal life,
of which impeccability is an essential part. Much more, therefore,
may we merit not to sin, i.e. to persevere.
Objection 3: Further, increase of grace is greater than perseverance
in the grace we already possess. But a man may merit an increase of
grace, as was stated above (Article 8). Much more, therefore, may he
merit perseverance in the grace he has already.
On the contrary, What we merit, we obtain from God, unless it is
hindered by sin. Now many have meritorious works, who do not
obtain perseverance; nor can it be urged that this takes place
because of the impediment of sin, since sin itself is opposed to
perseverance; and thus if anyone were to merit perseverance, God
would not permit him to fall into sin. Hence perseverance does not
come under merit.
I answer that, Since man's free-will is naturally flexible towards good
and evil, there are two ways of obtaining from God perseverance in
good: first, inasmuch as free-will is determined to good by
consummate grace, which will be in glory; secondly, on the part of
the Divine motion, which inclines man to good unto the end. Now as
explained above (Articles 6,7,8), that which is related as a term to the
free-will's movement directed to God the mover, falls under human
merit; and not what is related to the aforesaid movement as
principle. Hence it is clear that the perseverance of glory which is the
term of the aforesaid movement falls under merit; but perseverance
of the wayfarer does not fall under merit, since it depends solely on
the Divine motion, which is the principle of all merit. Now God freely
bestows the good of perseverance, on whomsoever He bestows it.