preside over the good spirits themselves."
Reply to Objection 1: Angel means "messenger." So all the heavenly
spirits, so far as they make known Divine things, are called "angels."
But the superior angels enjoy a certain excellence, as regards this
manifestation, from which the superior orders are denominated. The
lowest order of angels possess no excellence above the common
manifestation; and therefore it is denominated from manifestation
only; and thus the common name remains as it were proper to the
lowest order, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. v). Or we may say that
the lowest order can be specially called the order of "angels,"
forasmuch as they announce things to us immediately.
"Virtue" can be taken in two ways. First, commonly, considered as
the medium between the essence and the operation, and in that
sense all the heavenly spirits are called heavenly virtues, as also
"heavenly essences." Secondly, as meaning a certain excellence of
strength; and thus it is the proper name of an angelic order. Hence
Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. viii) that the "name 'virtues' signifies a
certain virile and immovable strength"; first, in regard of those
Divine operations which befit them; secondly, in regard to receiving
Divine gifts. Thus it signifies that they undertake fearlessly the
Divine behests appointed to them; and this seems to imply strength
of mind.
Reply to Objection 2: As Dionysius says (Div. Nom. xii): "Dominion is
attributed to God in a special manner, by way of excess: but the
Divine word gives the more illustrious heavenly princes the name of
Lord by participation, through whom the inferior angels receive the
Divine gifts." Hence Dionysius also states (Coel. Hier. viii) that the
name "Domination" means first "a certain liberty, free from servile
condition and common subjection, such as that of plebeians, and
from tyrannical oppression," endured sometimes even by the great.
Secondly, it signifies "a certain rigid and inflexible supremacy which
does not bend to any servile act, or to the act, of those who are
subject to or oppressed by tyrants." Thirdly, it signifies "the desire
and participation of the true dominion which belongs to God."
Likewise the name of each order signifies the participation of what
belongs to God; as the name "Virtues" signifies the participation of
the Divine virtue; and the same principle applies to the rest.
Reply to Objection 3: The names "Domination," "Power," and
"Principality" belong to government in different ways. The place of a

lord is only to prescribe what is to be done. So Gregory says (Hom.
xxiv in Evang.), that "some companies of the angels, because others
are subject to obedience to them, are called dominations." The name
"Power" points out a kind of order, according to what the Apostle
says, "He that resisteth the power, resisteth the ordination of
God" (Rm. 13:2). And so Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. viii) that the
name "Power" signifies a kind of ordination both as regards the
reception of Divine things, and as regards the Divine actions
performed by superiors towards inferiors by leading them to things
above. Therefore, to the order of "Powers" it belongs to regulate
what is to be done by those who are subject to them. To preside
[principari] as Gregory says (Hom. xxiv in Ev.) is "to be first among
others," as being first in carrying out what is ordered to be done.
And so Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. ix) that the name of
"Principalities" signifies "one who leads in a sacred order." For
those who lead others, being first among them, are properly called
"princes," according to the words, "Princes went before joined with
singers" (Ps. 67:26).
Reply to Objection 4: The "Archangels," according to Dionysius
(Coel. Hier. ix), are between the "Principalities" and the "Angels." A
medium compared to one extreme seems like the other, as
participating in the nature of both extremes; thus tepid seems cold
compared to hot, and hot compared to cold. So the "Archangels" are
called the "angel princes"; forasmuch as they are princes as regards
the "Angels," and angels as regards the Principalities. But according
to Gregory (Hom. xxiv in Ev.) they are called "Archangels," because
they preside over the one order of the "Angels"; as it were,
announcing greater things: and the "Principalities" are so called as
presiding over all the heavenly "Virtues" who fulfil the Divine
commands.
Reply to Objection 5: The name "Seraphim" does not come from
charity only, but from the excess of charity, expressed by the word
ardor or fire. Hence Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii) expounds the name
"Seraphim" according to the properties of fire, containing an excess
of heat. Now in fire we may consider three things. First, the
movement which is upwards and continuous. This signifies that they
are borne inflexibly towards God. Secondly, the active force which is
"heat," which is not found in fire simply, but exists with a certain
sharpness, as being of most penetrating action, and reaching even
to the smallest things, and as it were, with superabundant fervor;
whereby is signified the action of these angels, exercised powerfully