the theft of one. As to cattle, they were yet more difficult to
safeguard, because they are kept in the fields, and do not graze in
flocks as sheep do; wherefore a yet more heavy penalty was inflicted
in their regard, so that five oxen were to be restored for one ox. And
this I say, unless perchance the animal itself were discovered in the
thief's possession: because in that case he had to restore only twice
the number, as in the case of other thefts: for there was reason to
presume that he intended to restore the animal, since he kept it alive.
Again, we might say, according to a gloss, that "a cow is useful in
five ways: it may be used for sacrifice, for ploughing, for food, for
milk, and its hide is employed for various purposes": and therefore
for one cow five had to be restored. But the sheep was useful in four
ways: "for sacrifice, for meat, for milk, and for its wool." The unruly
son was slain, not because he ate and drank: but on account of his
stubbornness and rebellion, which was always punished by death,
as stated above. As to the man who gathered sticks on the sabbath,
he was stoned as a breaker of the Law, which commanded the
sabbath to be observed, to testify the belief in the newness of the
world, as stated above (Question 100, Article 5): wherefore he was
slain as an unbeliever.
Reply to Objection 1:: The Old Law inflicted the death penalty for the
more grievous crimes, viz. for those which are committed against
God, and for murder, for stealing a man, irreverence towards one's
parents, adultery and incest. In the case of thief of other things it
inflicted punishment by indemnification: while in the case of blows
and mutilation it authorized punishment by retaliation; and likewise
for the sin of bearing false witness. In other faults of less degree it
prescribed the punishment of stripes or of public disgrace.
The punishment of slavery was prescribed by the Law in two cases.
First, in the case of a slave who was unwilling to avail himself of the
privilege granted by the Law, whereby he was free to depart in the
seventh year of remission: wherefore he was punished by remaining
a slave for ever. Secondly, in the case of a thief, who had not
wherewith to make restitution, as stated in Ex. 22:3.
The punishment of absolute exile was not prescribed by the Law:
because God was worshipped by that people alone, whereas all
other nations were given to idolatry: wherefore if any man were
exiled from that people absolutely, he would be in danger of falling
into idolatry. For this reason it is related (1 Kgs. 26:19) that David
said to Saul: "They are cursed in the sight of the Lord, who have

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

case me out this day, that I should not dwell in the inheritance of the
Lord, saying: Go, serve strange gods." There was, however, a
restricted sort of exile: for it is written in Dt. 19:4 [Num. 35:25] that
"he that striketh his neighbor ignorantly, and is proved to have had
no hatred against him, shall flee to one of the cities" of refuge and
"abide there until the death of the high-priest." For then it became
lawful for him to return home, because when the whole people thus
suffered a loss they forgot their private quarrels, so that the next of
kin of the slain were not so eager to kill the slayer.
Reply to Objection 1:: Dumb animals were ordered to be slain, not on
account of any fault of theirs; but as a punishment to their owners,
who had not safeguarded their beasts from these offenses. Hence
the owner was more severely punished if his ox had butted anyone
"yesterday or the day before" (in which case steps might have been
taken to butting suddenly). Or again, the animal was slain in
detestation of the sin; and lest men should be horrified at the sight
thereof.
Reply to Objection 1:: The literal reason for this commandment, as
Rabbi Moses declares (Doct. Perplex. iii), was because the slayer
was frequently from the nearest city: wherefore the slaying of the
calf was a means of investigating the hidden murder. This was
brought about in three ways. In the first place the elders of the city
swore that they had taken every measure for safeguarding the roads.
Secondly, the owner of the heifer was indemnified for the slaying of
his beast, and if the murder was previously discovered, the beast
was not slain. Thirdly, the place, where the heifer was slain,
remained uncultivated. Wherefore, in order to avoid this twofold
loss, the men of the city would readily make known the murderer, if
they knew who he was: and it would seldom happen but that some
word or sign would escape about the matter. Or again, this was done
in order to frighten people, in detestation of murder. Because the
slaying of a heifer, which is a useful animal and full of strength,
especially before it has been put under the yoke, signified that
whoever committed murder, however useful and strong he might be,
was to forfeit his life; and that, by a cruel death, which was implied
by the striking off of its head; and that the murderer, as vile and
abject, was to be cut off from the fellowship of men, which was
betokened by the fact that the heifer after being slain was left to rot
in a rough and uncultivated place.
Mystically, the heifer taken from the herd signifies the flesh of Christ;