FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.5.

ordained to this end, since all the other virtues are commanded by
charity. Hence the merit of life everlasting pertains first to charity,
and secondly, to the other virtues, inasmuch as their acts are
commanded by charity. So, likewise, is it manifest that what we do
out of love we do most willingly. Hence, even inasmuch as merit
depends on voluntariness, merit is chiefly attributed to charity.
Reply to Objection 1: Charity, inasmuch as it has the last end for
object, moves the other virtues to act. For the habit to which the end
pertains always commands the habits to which the means pertain, as
was said above (Question 9, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 2: A work can be toilsome and difficult in two
ways: first, from the greatness of the work, and thus the greatness of
the work pertains to the increase of merit; and thus charity does not
lessen the toil---rather, it makes us undertake the greatest toils, "for
it does great things, if it exists," as Gregory says (Hom. in Evang.
xxx). Secondly, from the defect of the operator; for what is not done
with a ready will is hard and difficult to all of us, and this toil lessens
merit and is removed by charity.
Reply to Objection 3: The act of faith is not meritorious unless
"faith . . . worketh by charity" (Gal. 5:6). So, too, the acts of patience
and fortitude are not meritorious unless a man does them out of
charity, according to 1 Cor. 13:3: "If I should deliver my body to be
burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a man may merit for himself the first

grace?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man may merit for himself the first
grace, because, as Augustine says (Ep. clxxxvi), "faith merits
justification." Now a man is justified by the first grace. Therefore a
man may merit the first grace.
Objection 2: Further, God gives grace only to the worthy. Now, no
one is said to be worthy of some good, unless he has merited it
condignly. Therefore we may merit the first grace condignly.
Objection 3: Further, with men we may merit a gift already received.
Thus if a man receives a horse from his master, he merits it by a
good use of it in his master's service. Now God is much more
bountiful than man. Much more, therefore, may a man, by
subsequent works, merit the first grace already received from God.
On the contrary, The nature of grace is repugnant to reward of
works, according to Rm. 4:4: "Now to him that worketh, the reward is
not reckoned according to grace but according to debt." Now a man
merits what is reckoned to him according to debt, as the reward of
his works. Hence a man may not merit the first grace.
I answer that, The gift of grace may be considered in two ways: first
in the nature of a gratuitous gift, and thus it is manifest that all merit
is repugnant to grace, since as the Apostle says (Rm. 11:6), "if by
grace, it is not now by works." Secondly, it may be considered as
regards the nature of the thing given, and thus, also, it cannot come
under the merit of him who has not grace, both because it exceeds
the proportion of nature, and because previous to grace a man in the
state of sin has an obstacle to his meriting grace, viz. sin. But when
anyone has grace, the grace already possessed cannot come under
merit, since reward is the term of the work, but grace is the principle
of all our good works, as stated above (Question 109). But of anyone
merits a further gratuitous gift by virtue of the preceding grace, it
would not be the first grace. Hence it is manifest that no one can
merit for himself the first grace.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (Retract. i, 23), he was
deceived on this point for a time, believing the beginning of faith to