John 8:17
"It is written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true."
3. What would the heretics say here? (They would say,) "How is he better
than man, if we take what he has said simply? For this rule is laid down in the
case of men, because no man by himself is trustworthy. But in the case of God,
how can one endure such a mode of speaking? How then is the word 'two' used?
Is it because they are two, or because being men they are therefore two? If it is
because they are two, why did he not betake himself to John, and say, I bear
witness of myself, and John bears witness of me? Wherefore not to the angels?
Wherefore not to the prophets? For he might have found ten thousand other
testimonies." But he desires to show not this only that there are Two, but also
that they are of the same Substance.

John 8:19
"Then said they unto Him, Who is your father? Jesus answered, You neither
know Me, nor My Father."
Because while they knew they spoke as though they knew not, and as if
trying Him, He does not even deem them worthy of an answer. Wherefore
henceforth He speaks all more clearly and more boldly; drawing His testimony
from signs, and from His teaching of them that followed Him, and by the Cross
being near. For, "I know," He says, "whence I come." This would not greatly
affect them, but the adding, "and whither I go," would rather terrify them, since
He was not to remain in death. But why said He not, "I know that I am God,"
instead of, "I know whence I come"? He ever mingles lowly words with sublime,
and even these He veils. For after saying, "I bear witness of Myself," and proving
this, He descends to a humbler strain. As though He had said, "I know from
whom I am sent, and to whom I depart." For so they could have had nothing to
say against it, when they heard that He was sent from Him, and would depart to
Him. "I could not have spoken," He says, "any falsehood, I who have come from
thence, and depart there, to the true God. But ye know not God, and therefore
judge according to the flesh. For if having heard so many sure signs and proofs
ye still say, 'your witness is not true,' if you deem Moses worthy of credit, both as
to what he speaks concerning others and what he speaks concerning himself, but
Christ not so, this is to judge according to the flesh." "But I judge no man." He
says indeed also that "the Father judges no man." [John 5:22] How then does He
here declare, that, "If I judge, My judgment is just, for I am not alone"? He again
speaks in reply to their thoughts. "The judgment which is Mine is the judgment of
the Father. The Father, judging, would not judge otherwise than as I do, and I
should not judge otherwise than as the Father." Wherefore did He mention the
Father? Because they would not have thought that the Son was to be believed
unless He received the witness of the Father. Besides, the saying does not even