5. But faith, of which we are compelled, by reason of the arrangement of
our subject, to dispute somewhat more at length in this book: faith I say,
which they who have are called the faithful, and they who have not,
unbelievers, as were those who did not receive the Son of God coming to
His own; although it is wrought in us by hearing, yet does not belong to
that sense of the body which is called hearing, since it is not a sound; nor
to the eyes of this our flesh, since it is neither color nor bodily form; nor
to that which is called touch, since it has nothing of bulk; nor to any sense
of the body at all, since it is a thing of the heart, not of the body; nor is it
without apart from us, but deeply seated within us; nor does any man see
it in another, but each one in himself. Lastly, it is a thing that can both be
feigned by pretence, and be thought to be in him in whom it is not.
Therefore every one sees his own faith in himself; but does not see, but
believes, that it is in another; and believes this the more firmly, the more
he knows the fruits of it, which faith is wont to work by love. And
therefore this faith is common to all of whom the evangelist subjoins,
"But as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on His name: which were born, not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God;"
common I say, not as any form of a bodily object is common, as regards
sight, to the eyes of all to whom it is present, for in some way the gaze of
all that behold it is informed by the same one form; but as the human
countenance can be said to be common to all men; for this is so said, that
yet each certainly has his own. We say certainly with perfect truth, that
the faith of believers is impressed from one doctrine upon the heart of
each several person who believes the same thing. But that which is
believed is a different thing from the faith by which it is believed. For the
former is in things which are said either to be, or to have been, or to be
about to be; but the latter is in the mind of the believer, and is visible to
him only whose it is; although not indeed itself, but a faith like it, is also
in others. For it is not one in number, but in kind; yet on account of the
likeness, and the absence of all difference, we rather call it one than

many. For when, too, we see two men exceedingly alike, we wonder, and
say that both have one countenance. It is therefore more easily said that
the souls were many,—a several soul, of course, for each several person—
of whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that they were of one soul,—
than it is, where the apostle speaks of "one faith," for any one to venture
to say that there are as many faiths as there are faithful. And yet He who
says, "O woman, great is thy faith;" and to another, "O thou of little faith,
wherefore didst thou doubt?" intimates that each has his own faith. But
the like faith of believers is said to be one, in the same way as a like will of
those who will is said to be one; since in the case also of those who have
the same will, the will of each is visible to himself, but that of the other is
not visible, although he wills the same thing; and if it intimate itself by
any signs, it is believed rather! than seen. But each being conscious of his
own mind certainly does not believe, but manifestly sees outright, that
this is his own will.