show, but only that he has not sinned, or rather not even this, but that he was
saved by grace only, and when he sees others crowned, in splendor, and highly
approved: even if he fall not into hell, tell me, will he endure his despondency?
10. But to make the matter clear by an example, Suppose there are two
soldiers, and that one of them steals, injures, overreaches, and that the other does
none of these things, but acts the part of a brave man, does important things well,
sets up trophies in war, stains his right hand with blood; then when the time
arrives, suppose that (from the same rank in which the thief also was) he is at
once conducted to the imperial throne and the purple; but suppose that the other
remains there where he was, and merely of the royal kindness does not pay the
penalty of his deeds, let him however be in the last place, and let him be
stationed under the King. Tell me, will he be able to endure his despair when he
sees him who was [ranked] with himself ascended even to the very highest
dignities, and made thus glorious, and master of the world, while he himself still
remains below, and has not even been freed from punishment with honor, but
through the grace and kindness of the King? For even should the King forgive
him, and release him from the charges against him, still he will live in shame; for
surely not even will others admire him: since in such forgiveness, we admire not
those who receive the gifts, but those who bestow them. And as much as the
gifts are greater, so much the more are they ashamed who receive them, when
their transgressions are great.
With what eyes then will such an one be able to look on those who are in
the King's courts, when they exhibit their sweatings out of number and their
wounds, while he has nothing to show, but has his salvation itself of the mere
loving-kindness of God? For as if one were to beg off a murderer, a thief, an
adulterer, when he was going to be arrested, and were to command him to stay at
the porch of the King's palace, he will not afterwards be able to look any man in
the face, although he has been set free from punishment: so too surely is this
man's case.
For do not, I beseech you, suppose that because it is called a palace,

therefore all attain the same things. For if here in King.' courts there is the
Prefect, and all who are about the King, and also those who are in very inferior
stations, and occupy the place of what are called Decani (though the interval be
so great between the Prefect and the Decanus) much more shall this be so in the
royal court above.
And this I say not of myself. For Paul lays down another difference greater
even than these. For (he says) as many differences as there are between the sun
and the moon and the stars and the very smallest star, so many also between
those in the kingdom [of Heaven]. And that the difference between the sun and
the smallest star is far greater than that between the Decanus (as he is called) and
the Prefect, is evident to all. For while the sun shines upon all the world at once,
and makes it bright, and hides the moon and the stars, the other often does not
appear, not even in the dark. For there are many of the stars which we do not see.
When then we see others become suns, and we have the rank of the very smallest
stars, which are not even visible, what comfort shall we have?
Let us not, I beseech you, let us not be so slothful, not so inert, let us not
barter away the salvation of God for an easy life, but let us make merchandise of
it, and increase it. For even if one be a Catechumen, still he knows Christ, still he
understands the Faith, still he is a hearer of the divine oracles, still he is not far
from the knowledge; he knows the will of his Lord. Wherefore does he
procrastinate? Wherefore does he delay and postpone? Nothing is better than a
good life whether here or there, whether in case of the Enlightened or of the
Catechumens,
11. For tell me what burdensome command have we enjoined? Have a wife
(it is said) and be chaste. Is this difficult? How? When many, not Christians only
but heathens also, live chastely without a wife. That which the heathen surpasses
for vainglory, thou dost not even keep for the fear of God.
Give (He says) to the poor out of what you have. Is this burdensome? But in
this case also heathen condemn us who for vainglory only have emptied out their
whole possessions.