Hebrews 12:8
3. Then again [he argues] from the general custom. Do you see how he
brings up arguments from all quarters, from facts in the Scripture, from its
words, from our own notions, from examples in ordinary life? [Hebrews 12:8]
"But if you be without chastisement" [&c.]. Do you see that he said what I just
mentioned, that it is not possible to be a son without being chastened? For as in
families, fathers care not for bastards, though they learn nothing, though they be
not distinguished, but fear for their legitimate sons lest they should be indolent,
[so here.]. If then not to be chastised is [a mark] of bastards, we ought to rejoice
at chastisement, if this be [a sign] of legitimacy. "God deals with you as with
sons"; for this very cause.

Hebrews 12:9
"Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we
gave them reverence." Again, [he reasons] from their own experiences, from
what they themselves suffered. For as he says above, "Call to mind the former
days" [Hebrews 10:32], so here also "God" (he says) "deals with you as with
sons," and you could not say, We cannot bear it: yea, "as with sons" tenderly
beloved. For if they reverence their "fathers of the flesh," how shall not you
reverence your heavenly Father?
However the difference arises not from this alone, nor from the persons, but
also from the cause itself, and from the fact. For it is not on the same grounds
that He and they inflict chastisement: but they [did it] with a view to "what
seemed good to them," that is, fulfilling [their own] pleasure oftentimes, and not
always looking to what was expedient. But here, that cannot be said. For He
does this not for any interest of His own but for you, and for your benefit alone.
They [did it] that you might be useful to themselves also, oftentimes without
reason; but here there is nothing of this kind. Do you see that this also brings
consolation? For we are most closely attached to those [earthly parents], when
we see that not for any interests of their own they either command or advise us:
but their earnestness is, wholly and solely, on our account. For this is genuine
love, and love in reality, when we are beloved though we be of no use to him
who loves us—not that he may receive, but that he may impart. He chastens, He
does everything, He uses all diligence, that we may become capable of receiving
His benefits.

Hebrews 12:10
"For they verily" (he says) "for a few days chastened us after their own
pleasure, but He for our profit, that we might be partakers of His holiness."
[Hebrews 12:10]
What is "of his holiness"? It is, of His purity, so as to become worthy of
Him, according to our power. He earnestly desires that you may receive, and He
does all that He may give you: do ye not earnestly endeavor that you may
receive? "I said unto the Lord" (one says) "You are my Lord, for of my good
things You have no need." [Psalm 16:2]
"Furthermore," he says, "we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected
us and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection to the
Father of spirits, and live?" ("To the Father of spirits," whether of spiritual gifts,
or of prayers, or of the incorporeal powers.) If we die thus, then "we shall live.
For they indeed for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure," for what
seems [so] is not always profitable, but "He for our profit."
4. Therefore chastisement is "profitable"; therefore chastisement is a
"participation of holiness." Yea and this greatly: for when it casts out sloth, and
evil desire, and love of the things of this life, when it helps the soul, when it
causes a light esteem of all things here (for affliction [does] this), is it not holy?
Does it not draw down the grace of the Spirit?
Let us consider the righteous, from what cause they all shone brightly forth.
Was it not from affliction? And, if you will, let us enumerate them from the first
and from the very beginning: Abel, Noah himself; for it is not possible that he,
being the only one in that so great multitude of the wicked, should not have been
afflicted; for it is said, "Noah being" alone "perfect in his generation, pleased
God." [Genesis 6:9] For consider, I beseech you, if now, when we have
innumerable persons whose virtue we may emulate, fathers, and children, and