FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether any virtue is caused in us by

habituation?
Objection 1: It would seem that virtues can not be caused in us by
habituation. Because a gloss of Augustine [Lib. Sentent. Prosperi
cvi.] commenting on Rm. 14:23, "All that is not of faith is sin," says:
"The whole life of an unbeliever is a sin: and there is no good
without the Sovereign Good. Where knowledge of the truth is
lacking, virtue is a mockery even in the best behaved people." Now
faith cannot be acquired by means of works, but is caused in us by
God, according to Eph. 2:8: "By grace you are saved through faith."
Therefore no acquired virtue can be in us by habituation.
Objection 2: Further, sin and virtue are contraries, so that they are
incompatible. Now man cannot avoid sin except by the grace of God,
according to Wis. 8:21: "I knew that I could not otherwise be
continent, except God gave it." Therefore neither can any virtues be
caused in us by habituation, but only by the gift of God.
Objection 3: Further, actions which lead toward virtue, lack the
perfection of virtue. But an effect cannot be more perfect than its
cause. Therefore a virtue cannot be caused by actions that precede
it.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that good is more
efficacious than evil. But vicious habits are caused by evil acts.
Much more, therefore, can virtuous habits be caused by good acts.
I answer that, We have spoken above (Question 51, Articles 2,3) in a
general way about the production of habits from acts; and speaking
now in a special way of this matter in relation to virtue, we must take
note that, as stated above (Question 55, Articles 3,4), man's virtue
perfects him in relation to good. Now since the notion of good
consists in "mode, species, and order," as Augustine states (De Nat.
Boni. iii) or in "number, weight, and measure," as expressed in Wis.
11:21, man's good must needs be appraised with respect to some
rule. Now this rule is twofold, as stated above (Question 19, Articles
3,4), viz. human reason and Divine Law. And since Divine Law is the
higher rule, it extends to more things, so that whatever is ruled by
human reason, is ruled by the Divine Law too; but the converse does
not hold.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.3.

It follows that human virtue directed to the good which is defined
according to the rule of human reason can be caused by human
acts: inasmuch as such acts proceed from reason, by whose power
and rule the aforesaid good is established. On the other hand, virtue
which directs man to good as defined by the Divine Law, and not by
human reason, cannot be caused by human acts, the principle of
which is reason, but is produced in us by the Divine operation alone.
Hence Augustine in giving the definition of the latter virtue inserts
the words, "which God works in us without us" (Super Ps. 118, Serm.
xxvi). It is also of these virtues that the First Objection holds good.
Reply to Objection 2: Mortal sin is incompatible with divinely infused
virtue, especially if this be considered in its perfect state. But actual
sin, even mortal, is compatible with humanly acquired virtue;
because the use of a habit in us is subject to our will, as stated
above (Question 49, Article 3): and one sinful act does not destroy a
habit of acquired virtue, since it is not an act but a habit, that is
directly contrary to a habit. Wherefore, though man cannot avoid
mortal sin without grace, so as never to sin mortally, yet he is not
hindered from acquiring a habit of virtue, whereby he may abstain
from evil in the majority of cases, and chiefly in matters most
opposed to reason. There are also certain mortal sins which man can
nowise avoid without grace, those, namely, which are directly
opposed to the theological virtues, which are in us through the gift of
grace. This, however, will be more fully explained later (Question
109, Article 4).
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Article 1; Question 51, Article
1), certain seeds or principles of acquired virtue pre-exist in us by
nature. These principles are more excellent than the virtues acquired
through them: thus the understanding of speculative principles is
more excellent than the science of conclusions, and the natural
rectitude of the reason is more excellent than the rectification of the
appetite which results through the appetite partaking of reason,
which rectification belongs to moral virtue. Accordingly human acts,
in so far as they proceed from higher principles, can cause acquired
human virtues.