themselves receive.'
"While they themselves also with supplication." 'For in respect of these
things,' says he, 'they give thanks to God, but in respect of your love and your
coming together, they beseech Him that they may be counted worthy to see you.
For they long after this, not for the money's sake, but that they may be witnesses
of the grace that has been bestowed upon you.' Do you see Paul's wisdom, how
after having exalted them, he ascribed the whole to God by calling the thing
"grace?" For seeing he had spoken great things of them, in that he called them
ministers and exalted them unto a great height, (since they offered service while
he himself did but administer ,) and termed them 'proved ,' he shows that God
was the Author of all these things. And he himself again, along with them, sends
up thanksgiving, saying,

2 Corinthians 9:15
"Thanks be to God for His unspeakable gift."
And here he calls "gift," even those so many good things which are wrought
by almsgiving, both to them that receive and them that give; or else, those
unspeakable good things which through His advent He gave unto the whole
world with great munificence, which one may suspect to be the most probable.
For that he may at once both sober, and make them more liberal, he puts them in
mind of the benefits they had received from God. For this avails very greatly in
inciting unto all virtue; and therefore he concluded his discourse with it. But if
His Gift be unspeakable, what can match their frenzy who raise curious
questions as to His Essence? But not only is His Gift unspeakable, but that
"peace" also "passes all understanding," [Philippians 4:7] whereby He
reconciled the things which are above with those which are below.
3. Seeing then that we are in the enjoyment of so great grace, let us strive to
exhibit a virtue of life worthy of it, and to make much account of almsgiving.
And this we shall do, if we shun excess and drunkenness and gluttony. For God
gave meat and drink not for excess, but for nourishment. For it is not the wine
that produces drunkenness, for if that were the case, every body would needs be
drunken. 'But,' says one, 'it would be better, if even to drink it largely did not
injure.' These are drunkards' words. For if to drink it largely does injure, and yet
not even so you desist from your excess in it; if this is so disgraceful and
injurious, and yet you cease not even so from your depraved longing; if it were
possible both to drink largely and be nothing harmed, where would you have
stayed in your excess? Would you not have longed that the rivers even might
become wine? Would you not have destroyed and ruined everything? If there is a
mean in food which when we overpass we are injured, and yet even so you can
not bear the curb, but snapping it as under seizest on what every body else has,