Homily 26 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XII. 1, 2
"Now at that time Herod the King stretched forth his hands to vex certain of
the Church. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword. And
because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also.
Then were the days of unleavened bread."
"At that time," of course meaning the time immediately following: for this
is the custom of Scripture. And he well says that Herod "the king" (did this): this
was not he of Christ's time. Lo, a different sort of trial— and mark what I said in
the beginning, how things are blended, how rest and trouble alternate in the
whole texture of the history— not now the Jews, nor the Sanhedrin, but the king.
Greater the power, the warfare more severe, the more it was done to obtain favor
with the Jews. "And," it says, "he slew James the brother of John with the
sword:" (taking him) at random and without selection. But, should any raise a
question, why God permitted this, we shall say, that it was for the sake of these
(Jews) themselves: thereby, first, convincing them, that even when slain (the
Apostles) prevail, just as it was in the case of Stephen: secondly, giving them
opportunity, after satiating their rage, to recover from their madness; thirdly,
showing them that it was by His permission this was done. "And when he saw,"
it says, that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to seize Peter also. O
excessive wickedness! On whose behalf was it, that he gratified them by doing
murders thus without plan or reason? "And it was the day of unleavened bread."
Again, the idle preciseness of the Jews: to kill indeed they forbade not, but at
such a time they did such things! "Whom having arrested, he put in ward, having
delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers." [Acts 12:4] This was done both of
rage, and of fear. "He slew," it says, "James the brother of John with the sword."
Do you mark their courage? For, that none may say that without danger or fear

of danger they brave death, as being sure of God's delivering them, therefore he
permits some to be put to death, and chief men too, Stephen and James, thereby
convincing their slayers themselves, that not even these things make them fall
away, and hinder them. "Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was
made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him." [Acts 12:5] For the
contest was now for life and death: both the slaying of the one made them
fearful, and the casting of the other into prison. "And when Herod would have
brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers,
bound with two chains; and the keepers before the door kept the prison. And,
behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison:
and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And
his chains fell off from his hands." (v. 6, 7.) In that night He delivered him. "And
a light shined in the prison," that he might not deem it fancy: and none saw the
light, but he only. For if, notwithstanding this was done, he thought it a fancy,
because of its unexpectedness; if this had not been, much more would he have
thought this: so prepared was he for death. For his having waited there many
days and not being saved caused this. Why then, say you, did He not suffer him
to fall into the hands of Herod, and then deliver him? Because that would have
brought people into astonishment, whereas this was credible: and they would not
even have been thought human beings. But in the case of Stephen, what did He
not do? Did He not show them his face as it had been the face of an angel? But
what in short did He leave undone here also? "And the angel said to him, Gird
yourself, and bind on your sandals." [Acts 12:8] Here again it shows, that it was
not done of craft: for one that is in haste and wishes to break out (of prison), is
not so particular as to take his sandals, and gird himself. "And he did so. And he
said unto him, Put on your cloak, and follow me. And he went out, and followed
him; and knew not that it was true which was done by the Angel; but thought he
saw a vision. When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto
the iron gate that leads unto the city; which opened to them of its own accord."
(v. 9, 10.) Behold, a second miracle. "And they went out, and passed on through