distracted, but he kept his whole mind intent upon the king. So that if we would,
this is possible to us also.
For were He distant from us in place, you might well doubt, but if He is
present everywhere, to him that strives and is in earnest He is near. Wherefore
also the prophet said, "I will fear no evil, for You are with me; " and God Himself
again, "I am a God near at hand, and not a God afar off." [Jeremiah 23:23] Then
as our sins separate us from Him, so do our righteousnesses draw us near unto
Him. "For while you are yet speaking," it is said, "I will say, Here I am." What
father would ever be thus obedient to his offspring? What mother is there, so
ready, and continually standing, if haply her children call her? There is not one,
no father, no mother: but God stands continually waiting, if any of his servants
should perchance call Him; and never, when we have called as we ought, has He
refused to hear. Therefore He says, "While you are yet speaking," I do not wait
for you to finish, and I straightway hearken.
9. Let us call Him therefore, as it is His will to be called. But what is this
His will? "Loose," says He, "every band of iniquity, unloose the twisted knots of
oppressive covenants, tear in pieces every unjust contract. Break your bread to
the hungry, and bring in the poor that are cast out to your house. If you see one
naked, cover him, and them that belong to your seed you shall not overlook.
Then shall your light break forth in the morning, and your healings shall spring
forth speedily, and your righteousness shall go before you, and the glory of the
Lord shall cover you. Then you shall call upon me, and I will give ear unto you;
while you are yet speaking, I will say, Lo! Here I am."
And who is able to do all this? It may be asked. Nay, who is unable, I pray
you? For which is difficult of the things I have mentioned? Which is laborious?
Which not easy?
Why, so entirely are they not possible only, but even easy, that many have
actually overshot the measure of those sayings, not only tearing in pieces unjust
contracts, but even stripping themselves of all their goods; making the poor
welcome not to roof and table, but even to the sweat of their body, and laboring

in order to maintain them; doing good not to kinsmen only, but even to enemies.
But what is there at all even hard in these sayings? For neither did He say,
"Pass over the mountain, go across the sea, dig through so many acres of land,
abide without food, wrap yourself in sackcloth;" but, "Impart to the poor, impart
of your bread, cancel the contracts unjustly made."
What is more easy than this? Tell me. But even if you account it difficult,
look, I pray you, at the rewards also, and it shall be easy to you.
For much as our emperors at the horse races heap together before the
combatants crowns, and prizes, and garments, even so Christ also sets His
rewards in the midst of His course, holding them out by the prophet's words, as it
were by many hands. And the emperors, although they be ten thousand times
emperors, yet as being men, and the wealth which they have in a course of
spending, and their munificence of exhaustion, are ambitious of making the little
appear much; wherefore also they commit each thing severally into the hand of
the several attendants, and so bring it forward. But our King contrariwise, having
heaped all together (because He is very rich, and does nothing for display), He
so brings it forward, and what He so reaches out is indefinitely great, and will
need many hands to hold it. And to make you aware of this, examine each
particular of it carefully.
"Then," says He, "shall your light break forth in the morning." Does not
this gift appear to you as some one thing? But it is not one; nay, for it has many
things in it, both prizes, and crowns, and other rewards. And, if you are minded,
let us take it to pieces and show all its wealth, as it shall be possible for us to
show it; only do not ye grow weary.
And first, let us learn the meaning of "It shall break forth." For He said not
at all, "shall appear," but "shall break forth;" declaring to us its quickness and
plentifulness, and how exceedingly He desires our salvation, and how the good
things themselves travail to come forth, and press on; and that which would
check their unspeakable force shall be nought; by all which He indicates their
plentifulness, and the infinity of His abundance. But what is "the morning." It