and the same vivifying faith, which has been preserved in the Church from the apostles until now,
and handed down in truth.
4. But Polycarp also was not only instructed by apostles, and conversed with many who had
seen Christ, but was also, by apostles in Asia, appointed bishop of the Church in Smyrna, whom I
also saw in my early youth, for he tarried [on earth] a very long time, and, when a very old man,
gloriously and most nobly suffering martyrdom, departed this life, having always taught the
things which he had learned from the apostles, and which the Church has handed down, and which
alone are true. To these things all the Asiatic Churches testify, as do also those men who have
succeeded Polycarp down to the present time,—a man who was of much greater weight, and a more
stedfast witness of truth, than Valentinus, and Marcion, and the rest of the heretics. He it was who,
coming to Rome in the time of Anicetus caused many to turn away from the aforesaid heretics to
the Church of God, proclaiming that he had received this one and sole truth from the apostles,—that,
namely, which is handed down by the Church. There are also those who heard from him that
John, the disciple of the Lord, going to bathe at Ephesus, and perceiving Cerinthus within, rushed
out of the bath-house without bathing, exclaiming, "Let us fly, lest even the bath-house fall down,
because Cerinthus, the enemy of the truth, is within." And Polycarp himself replied to Marcion,
who met him on one occasion, and said, "Dost thou know me?" "I do know thee, the first-born of
Satan." Such was the horror which the apostles and their disciples had against holding even verbal
communication with any corrupters of the truth; as Paul also says, "A man that is an heretic, after
the first and second admonition, reject; knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being
condemned of himself." There is also a very powerful Epistle of Polycarp written to the
Philippians, from which those who choose to do so, and are anxious about their salvation, can learn
the character of his faith, and the preaching of the truth. Then, again, the Church in Ephesus, founded
by Paul, and having John remaining among them permanently until the times of Trajan, is a true
witness of the tradition of the apostles.

### Chapter IV.—The truth is to be found nowhere else but in the Catholic Church, the sole
depository of apostolical doctrine. Heresies are of recent formation, and cannot trace their
origin up to the apostles.
was contemporary with St. John for nearly twenty years.

1. Since therefore we have such proofs, it is not necessary to seek the truth among others which
it is easy to obtain from the Church; since the apostles, like a rich man [depositing his money] in
a bank, lodged in her hands most copiously all things pertaining to the truth: so that every man,
whosoever will, can draw from her the water of life. For she is the entrance to life; all others
are thieves and robbers. On this account are we bound to avoid them, but to make choice of the
thing pertaining to the Church with the utmost diligence, and to lay hold of the tradition of the truth.
For how stands the case? Suppose there arise a dispute relative to some important question among
us, should we not have recourse to the most ancient Churches with which the apostles held constant
intercourse, and learn from them what is certain and clear in regard to the present question? For
how should it be if the apostles themselves had not left us writings? Would it not be necessary, [in
that case,] to follow the course of the tradition which they handed down to those to whom they did
commit the Churches?
2. To which course many nations of those barbarians who believe in Christ do assent, having
salvation written in their hearts by the Spirit, without paper or ink, and, carefully preserving the
ancient tradition, believing in one God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and all things therein,
by means of Christ Jesus, the Son of God; who, because of His surpassing love towards His creation,
condescended to be born of the virgin, He Himself uniting man through Himself to God, and having
suffered under Pontius Pilate, and rising again, and having been received up in splendour, shall
come in glory, the Saviour of those who are saved, and the Judge of those who are judged, and
sending into eternal fire those who transform the truth, and despise His Father and His advent.
Those who, in the absence of written documents, have believed this faith, are barbarians, so far
as regards our language; but as regards doctrine, manner, and tenor of life, they are, because of
faith, very wise indeed; and they do please God, ordering their conversation in all righteousness,
chastity, and wisdom. If any one were to preach to these men the inventions of the heretics, speaking
to them in their own language, they would at once stop their ears, and flee as far off as possible,
not enduring even to listen to the blasphemous address. Thus, by means of that ancient tradition of
the apostles, they do not suffer their mind to conceive anything of the [doctrines suggested by the]
portentous language of these teachers, among whom neither Church nor doctrine has ever been
established.
3. For, prior to Valentinus, those who follow Valentinus had no existence; nor did those from
Marcion exist before Marcion; nor, in short, had any of those malignant-minded people, whom I
have above enumerated, any being previous to the initiators and inventors of their perversity. For
Valentinus came to Rome in the time of Hyginus, flourished under Pius, and remained until Anicetus.