For whatsoever sin you will, first let us examine, and you shall see that so it
is engendered. For as robbers and they who dig through walls when they desire
to carry off any valuable thing, put out the candle and then do their work; so also
does men's perverse reasoning in the case of those who are committing sin. Since
in us also surely there is a light, the light of reason, ever burning. But if the spirit
of wickedness coming eagerly on with its strong blast quench that flame, it
straightway darkens the soul and prevails against it, and despoils it straightway
of all that is laid up therein. For when by unclean desire the soul is made captive,
even as a cloud and mist the eyes of the body, so that desire intercepts the
foresight of the mind, and suffers it to see nothing at any distance, either
precipice, or hell, or fear; but thenceforth, having that deceit as a tyrant over
him, he comes to be easily vanquished by sin; and there is raised up before his
eyes as it were a wall without windows, which suffers not the ray of
righteousness to shine in upon the mind, the absurd conceits of lust enclosing it
as with a rampart on all sides. And from that time forward the unchaste woman
is everywhere meeting him: standing present before his eyes, before his mind,
before his thoughts. And as the blind, although they stand at high noon beneath
the very central point of the heaven, receive not the light, their eyes being fast
closed up; just so these also, though ten thousand doctrines of salvation sound in
their ears from all quarters, having their soul preoccupied with this passion stop
their ears against such discourses. And they know it well who have made the
trial. But God forbid that you should know it from actual experience.
7. And not only this sin has these effects, but every misplaced affection as
well. For let us transfer, if you please, the argument from the unchaste woman
unto money, and we shall see here also thick and unbroken darkness. For in the
former case, inasmuch as the beloved object is one and shut up in one place, the
feeling is not so violent; but in the case of money which shows itself every
where, in silversmiths' shops, in taverns, in foundries for gold, in the houses of
the wealthy, the passion blows a vehement gale. For when servants swaggering
in the market place, horses with golden trappings, men decked with costly

garments, are seen with desire by him who has that distemper, the darkness
becomes intense which envelopes him. And why speak of houses and
silversmiths' shops? For my part I think that such persons, though it be but in a
picture and image that they see the wealth, are convulsed, and grow wild, and
rave. So that from all quarters the darkness gathers around them. And if they
chance to behold a portraiture of a King, they admire not the beauty of the
precious stones, nor yet the gold, nor the purple robe, but they pine away. And as
the wretched lover before mentioned, though he see but the image of the woman
beloved, cleaves unto the lifeless thing; so this man also, beholding a lifeless
image of wealth, is more strongly affected in the same way, as being holden of a
more tyrannical passion. And he must henceforth either abide at home, or if he
venture into the Forum, return home with innumerable hurts. For many are the
objects which grieve his eyes. And just as the former sees nothing else save the
woman, even so the latter hastens by poor persons, and all things else, that he
may not obtain so much as a slight alleviation. But upon the wealthy he steadily
fixes his eyes; by the sight of them introducing the fire into his own soul
mightily and vehemently. For it is a fire that miserably devours the person that
falls into it; and if no hell were threatened nor yet punishment, this condition
were itself punishment; to be continually tormented and never able to find an
end to the malady.
8. Well: these things alone might suffice to recommend our fleeing from
this distemper. But there is no greater evil than inconsideration which causes
men to be rivetted unto things that bring sorrow of heart and no advantage.
Wherefore I exhort that you cut off the passion at its beginning: for just as a
fever on its first attack, does not violently burn up the patients with thirst, but on
its increase and the heightening of its fire causes from that time incurable thirst;
and though one should let them fill themselves full of drink, it puts not out the
furnace but makes it burn fiercer: so also it happens in regard to this passion;
unless when it first invades our soul we stop it and shut the doors; having got in,
from that time it makes the disease of those who have admitted it incurable. For