good? Tell me. Is this glory? By no means; but ingloriousness, and slavery, and
bonds, and every burdensome thing one can say. But if the glory that comes of
men be so greatly to be coveted in your account, and if it quite disquiets you that
such and such an one is applauded of the many; when you behold him in the
enjoyment of that applause, pass over in your thought to the world to come and
the glory which is there. And just as when hurrying to escape the onset of a wild
beast, you enter into a cabin and shuttest to the doors; so now also flee unto the
life to come, and that unspeakable glory. For so shall you both tread this under
your feet, and wilt easily lay hold upon that, and wilt enjoy the true liberty, and
the eternal good things; whereunto may we all attain through the grace and love
towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy
Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 25 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 11:21
Yet whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak in foolishness,) I am bold also.
See him again drawing back and using depreciation and correctives
beforehand, although he has already even said many such things: "Would that
you could bear with me in a little foolishness;" [2 Corinthians 11:1] and again,
"Let no man think me foolish: if you do, yet as foolish receive me." [2
Corinthians 11:16] "That which I speak, I speak not after the Lord, but as in
foolishness." [2 Corinthians 11:17] "Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will
glory also;" [2 Corinthians 11:18] and here again, "Whereinsoever any is bold, (I
speak in foolishness) I am bold also." Boldness and folly he calls it to speak
anything great of himself, and that though there was a necessity, teaching us
even to an excess to avoid any thing of the sort. For if after we have done all, we
ought to call ourselves unprofitable; of what forgiveness can he be worthy who,
when no reason presses, exalts himself and boasts? Therefore also did the
Pharisee meet the fate he did, and even in harbor suffered shipwreck because he
struck upon this rock. Therefore also does Paul, although he sees very ample
necessity for it, draw back nevertheless, and keep on observing that such
speaking is a mark of foolishness. And then at length he makes the venture ,
putting forward the plea of necessity, and says,

2 Corinthians 11:22-23
"Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I."
For it was not all Hebrews that were Israelites, since both the Ammonites
and Moabites were Hebrews. Wherefore he added somewhat to clear his nobility
of descent, and says,
"Are they the seed of Abraham? So am I. Are they ministers of Christ. (I
speak as one beside himself,) I more."
He is not content with his former deprecation, but uses it again here also. "I
speak as one beside himself, I more." I am their superior and their better. And
indeed he possessed clear proofs of his superiority, but nevertheless even so he
terms the thing a folly. And yet if they were false Apostles, he heeded not to
have introduced his own superiority by way of comparison, but to have
destroyed their claim to "be ministers" at all. Well, he did destroy it, saying,
"False Apostles, deceitful workers, fashioning themselves into Apostles of
Christ," [2 Corinthians 11:13] but now he does not proceed in that way, for his
discourse was about to proceed to strict examination; and no one when an
examination is in hand simply asserts; but having first stated the case in the way
of comparison, he shows it to be negatived by the facts, a very strong negative.
But besides, it is their opinion he gives, not his own assertion, when he says,
"Are they ministers of Christ?" And having said, "I more," he proceeds in his
comparison, and shows that not by bare assertions, but by furnishing the proof
that facts supply, he maintains the impress of the Apostleship. And leaving all
his miracles, he begins with his trials; thus saying,
"In labors more abundantly, in stripes above measure." This latter is greater
than the former; to be both beaten and scourged.
"In prisons more abundantly." Here too again is there an increase. "In
deaths oft." [1 Corinthians 15:31] For, "I die," says he, "daily." But here, even in