FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.3.

merely passive.
Reply to Objection 2: If the first be removed, then what follows is
removed, provided that, properly speaking, it follow from that only.
But if something can follow from several things, it is not removed by
the fact that one of them is removed; thus if hardening is the effect of
heat and of cold (since bricks are hardened by the fire, and frozen
water is hardened by the cold), then by removing heat it does not
follow that there is no hardening. Now the accomplishment of an act
follows not only from consent, but also from the impulse of the
appetite, such as is found in irrational animals.
Reply to Objection 3: The man who acts through passion is able not
to follow the passion: whereas irrational animals have not that
power. Hence the comparison fails.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether consent is directed to the end or to the

means?
Objection 1: It would seem that consent is directed to the end.
Because that on account of which a thing is such is still more such.
But it is on account of the end that we consent to the means.
Therefore, still more do we consent to the end.
Objection 2: Further, the act of the intemperate man is his end, just
as the act of the virtuous man is his end. But the intemperate man
consents to his own act. Therefore consent can be directed to the
end.
Objection 3: Further, desire of the means is choice, as stated above
(Question 13, Article 1). If therefore consent were only directed to the
means it would nowise differ from choice. And this is proved to be
false by the authority of Damascene who says (De Fide Orth. ii, 22)
that "after the approval" which he calls "the sentence," "comes the
choice." Therefore consent is not only directed to the means.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 22) that the
"sentence," i.e. the consent, takes place "when a man approves and
embraces the judgment of his counsel." But counsel is only about
the means. Therefore the same applies to consent.
I answer that, Consent is the application of the appetitive movement
to something that is already in the power of him who causes the
application. Now the order of action is this: First there is the
apprehension of the end; then the desire of the end; then the counsel
about the means; then the desire of the means. Now the appetite
tends to the last end naturally: wherefore the application of the
appetitive movement to the apprehended end has not the nature of
consent, but of simple volition. But as to those things which come
under consideration after the last end, in so far as they are directed
to the end, they come under counsel: and so counsel can be applied
to them, in so far as the appetitive movement is applied to the
judgment resulting from counsel. But the appetitive movement to the
end is not applied to counsel: rather is counsel applied to it, because
counsel presupposes the desire of the end. On the other hand, the
desire of the means presupposes the decision of counsel. And
therefore the application of the appetitive movement to counsel's