would not receive Orders, for since a sacrament is a sign, not only
the thing, but the signification of the thing, is required in all
sacramental actions; thus it was stated above (Question 32, Article
2) that in Extreme Unction it is necessary to have a sick man, in
order to signify the need of healing. Accordingly, since it is not
possible in the female sex to signify eminence of degree, for a
woman is in the state of subjection, it follows that she cannot receive
the sacrament of Order. Some, however, have asserted that the male
sex is necessary for the lawfulness and not for the validity of the
sacrament, because even in the Decretals (cap. Mulieres dist. 32;
cap. Diaconissam, 27, qu. i) mention is made of deaconesses and
priestesses. But deaconess there denotes a woman who shares in
some act of a deacon, namely who reads the homilies in the Church;
and priestess [presbytera] means a widow, for the word "presbyter"
means elder.
Reply to Objection 1: Prophecy is not a sacrament but a gift of God.
Wherefore there it is not the signification, but only the thing which is
necessary. And since in matters pertaining to the soul woman does
not differ from man as to the thing (for sometimes a woman is found
to be better than many men as regards the soul), it follows that she
can receive the gift of prophecy and the like, but not the sacrament
of Orders.
And thereby appears the Reply to the Second and Third Objections.
However, as to abbesses, it is said that they have not ordinary
authority, but delegated as it were, on account of the danger of men
and women living together. But Debbora exercised authority in
temporal, not in priestly matters, even as now woman may have
temporal power.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether boys and those who lack the use of

reason can receive Orders?
Objection 1: It would seem that boys and those who lack the use of
reason cannot receive Orders. For, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D,
25), the sacred canons have appointed a certain fixed age in those
who receive Orders. But this would not be if boys could receive the
sacrament of Orders. Therefore, etc.
Objection 2: Further, the sacrament of Orders ranks above the
sacrament of matrimony. Now children and those who lack the use
of reason cannot contract matrimony. Neither therefore can they
receive Orders.
Objection 3: Further, act and power are in the same subject,
according to the Philosopher (De Somn. et Vigil. i). Now the act of
Orders requires the use of reason. Therefore the power of Orders
does also.
On the contrary, one who is raised to Orders before the age of
discretion is sometimes allowed to exercise them without being
reordained, as appears from Extra., De Cler. per salt. prom. But this
would not be the case if he had not received Orders. Therefore a boy
can receive Orders.
Further, boys can receive other sacraments in which a character is
imprinted, namely Baptism and Confirmation. Therefore in like
manner they can receive Orders.
I answer that, Boyhood and other defects which remove the use of
reason occasion an impediment to act. Wherefore the like are unfit to
receive all those sacraments which require an act on the part of the
recipient of the sacrament, such as Penance, Matrimony, and so
forth. But since infused powers like natural powers precede acts--although acquired powers follow acts---and the removal of that
which comes after does not entail the removal of what comes first, it
follows that children and those who lack the use of reason can
receive all the sacraments in which an act on the part of the recipient
is not required for the validity of the sacrament, but some spiritual
power is conferred from above; with this difference, however, that in
the minor orders the age of discretion is required out of respect for