SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.8.

counsel which would hinder him from thieving or robbing, or by
omitting to do what would have hindered him, or by sheltering him
after the deed. All these are expressed as follows:
"By command, by counsel, by consent, by flattery, by receiving, by
participation, by silence, by not preventing, by not denouncing."
It must be observed, however, that in five of these cases the
cooperator is always bound to restitution. First, in the case of
command: because he that commands is the chief mover, wherefore
he is bound to restitution principally. Secondly, in the case of
consent; namely of one without whose consent the robbery cannot
take place. Thirdly, in the case of receiving; when, to wit, a man is a
receiver of thieves, and gives them assistance. Fourthly, in the case
of participation; when a man takes part in the theft and in the booty.
Fifthly, he who does not prevent the theft, whereas he is bound to do
so; for instance, persons in authority who are bound to safeguard
justice on earth, are bound to restitution, if by their neglect thieves
prosper, because their salary is given to them in payment of their
preserving justice here below.
In the other cases mentioned above, a man is not always bound to
restitution: because counsel and flattery are not always the
efficacious cause of robbery. Hence the counsellor or flatterer is
bound to restitution, only when it may be judged with probability that
the unjust taking resulted from such causes.
Reply to Objection 1: Not only is he bound to restitution who
commits the sin, but also he who is in any way cause of the sin,
whether by counselling, or by commanding, or in any other way
whatever.
Reply to Objection 2: He is bound chiefly to restitution, who is the
principal in the deed; first of all, the "commander"; secondly, the
"executor," and in due sequence, the others: yet so that, if one of
them make restitution, another is not bound to make restitution to
the same person. Yet those who are principals in the deed, and who
took possession of the thing, are bound to compensate those who
have already made restitution. When a man commands an unjust
taking that does not follow, no restitution has to be made, since its
end is chiefly to restore the property of the person who has been
unjustly injured.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.8.

Reply to Objection 3: He that fails to denounce a thief or does not
withstand or reprehend him is not always bound to restitution, but
only when he is obliged, in virtue of his office, to do so: as in the
case of earthly princes who do not incur any great danger thereby;
for they are invested with public authority, in order that they may
maintain justice.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether a man is bound to immediate restitution,