SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.116, C.5.

Reply to Objection 4: To spend on oneself is an inclination of nature;
hence to spend money on others belongs properly to a virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.116, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether liberality is a part of justice?

Objection 1: It seems that liberality is not a part of justice. For justice
regards that which is due. Now the more a thing is due the less
liberally is it given. Therefore liberality is not a part of justice, but is
incompatible with it.
Objection 2: Further, justice is about operation as stated above
(Question 58, Article 9; FS, Question 60, Articles 2,3): whereas
liberality is chiefly about the love and desire of money, which are
passions. Therefore liberality seems to belong to temperance rather
than to justice.
Objection 3: Further, it belongs chiefly to liberality to give
becomingly, as stated (Article 4). But giving becomingly belongs to
beneficence and mercy, which pertain to charity, as state above
(Questions 30,31). Therefore liberality is a part of charity rather than
of justice.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Offic. i): "Justice has to do with
the fellowship of mankind. For the notion of fellowship is divided into
two parts, justice and beneficence, also called liberality or kindheartedness." Therefore liberality pertains to justice.
I answer that, Liberality is not a species of justice, since justice pays
another what is his whereas liberality gives another what is one's
own. There are, however, two points in which it agrees with justice:
first, that it is directed chiefly to another, as justice is; secondly, that
it is concerned with external things, and so is justice, albeit under a
different aspect, a stated in this Article and above (Article 2, ad 3).
Hence it is that liberality is reckoned by some to be a part of justice,
being annexed thereto as to a principal virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: Although liberality does no consider the legal
due that justice considers, it considers a certain moral due. This due
is based on a certain fittingness and not on an obligation: so that it
answers to the idea of due in the lowest degree.
Reply to Objection 2: Temperance is about concupiscence in
pleasures of the body. But the concupiscence and delight in money
is not referable to the body but rather to the soul. Hence liberality

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.116, C.6.

does not properly pertain to temperance.
Reply to Objection 3: The giving of beneficence and mercy proceeds
from the fact that a man has a certain affection towards the person to
whom he gives: wherefore this giving belongs to charity or
friendship. But the giving of liberality arises from a person being
affected in a certain way towards money, in that he desires it not nor
loves it: so that when it is fitting he gives it not only to his friends
but also to those whom he knows not. Hence it belong not to charity,
but to justice, which is about external things.