Acts x. 28, 29.

eating with the Gentiles, because of the vision, and of the Spirit who had rested upon them, yet,
when certain persons came from James, withdrew himself, and did not eat with them. And Paul
said that Barnabas likewise did the same thing. Thus did the apostles, whom the Lord made
witnesses of every action and of every doctrine—for upon all occasions do we find Peter, and
James, and John present with Him—scrupulously act according to the dispensation of the Mosaic
law, showing that it was from one and the same God; which they certainly never would have done,
as I have already said, if they had learned from the Lord [that there existed] another Father besides
Him who appointed the dispensation of the law.

Chapter XIII—Refutation of the opinion, that Paul was the only apostle who had knowledge
of the truth.

1. With regard to those (the Marcionites) who allege that Paul alone knew the truth, and that
to him the mystery was manifested by revelation, let Paul himself convict them, when he says, that
one and the same God wrought in Peter for the apostolate of the circumcision, and in himself for
the Gentiles. Peter, therefore, was an apostle of that very God whose was also Paul; and Him
whom Peter preached as God among those of the circumcision, and likewise the Son of God, did
Paul [declare] also among the Gentiles. For our Lord never came to save Paul alone, nor is God so
limited in means, that He should have but one apostle who knew the dispensation of His Son. And
again, when Paul says, "How beautiful are the feet of those bringing glad tidings of good things,
and preaching the Gospel of peace," he shows clearly that it was not merely one, but there were
many who used to preach the truth. And again, in the Epistle to the Corinthians, when he had
recounted all those who had seen God after the resurrection, he says in continuation, "But
whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed," acknowledging as one and the same,
the preaching of all those who saw God after the resurrection from the dead.
2. And again, the Lord replied to Philip, who wished to behold the Father, "Have I been so long
a time with you, and yet thou hast not known Me, Philip? He that sees Me, sees also the Father;
and how sayest thou then, Show us the Father? For I am in the Father, and the Father in Me; and

See note 9, p. 436.

henceforth ye know Him, and have seen Him." To these men, therefore, did the Lord bear witness,
that in Himself they had both known and seen the Father (and the Father is truth). To allege, then,
that these men did not know the truth, is to act the part of false witnesses, and of those who have
been alienated from the doctrine of Christ. For why did the Lord send the twelve apostles to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, if these men did not know the truth? How also did the seventy
preach, unless they had themselves previously known the truth of what was preached? Or how
could Peter have been in ignorance, to whom the Lord gave testimony, that flesh and blood had
not revealed to him, but the Father, who is in heaven?3534 Just, then, as "Paul [was] an apostle, not
of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father," [so with the rest;] the Son
indeed leading them to the Father, but the Father revealing to them the Son.
3. But that Paul acceded to [the request of] those who summoned him to the apostles, on account
of the question [which had been raised], and went up to them, with Barnabas, to Jerusalem, not
without reason, but that the liberty of the Gentiles might be confirmed by them, he does himself
say, in the Epistle to the Galatians: "Then, fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem with
Barnabas, taking also Titus. But I went up by revelation, and communicated to them that Gospel
which I preached among the Gentiles." And again he says, "For an hour we did give place to
subjection, that the truth of the gospel might continue with you." If, then, any one shall, from
the Acts of the Apostles, carefully scrutinize the time concerning which it is written that he went
up to Jerusalem on account of the forementioned question, he will find those years mentioned by
Paul coinciding with it. Thus the statement of Paul harmonizes with, and is, as it were, identical
with, the testimony of Luke regarding the apostles.