consumed on this love, and we rob, and defraud, and are slaves to vainglory;
than which what can be more worthless?
For though you should become infinitely conspicuous, you will be nothing
better than the base: rather for this selfsame cause you will even be baser. For
when they who are willing to give you glory, and make you illustrious, do for
this very cause ridicule you, that you desire the glory which comes of them, how
can such instances fail to turn the contrary way in regard of you. For indeed this
thing is among those which attract censure. So that even as in the case of one
desiring to commit adultery or fornication, should any one praise or flatter him,
by this very act he becomes an accuser rather than a commender of the person
indulging such desires: so with regard to him who is desirous of glory; when we
all praise, it is accusation rather than praise which we bestow on those who wish
to be made glorious.
18. Why then bring upon yourself that, from which the very opposite is
wont to befall you. Yea, if you will be glorified, despise glory; so shall you be
more illustrious than any. Why feel as Nebuchadnezzar felt? For he too set up an
image, thinking from wood and from a senseless figure to procure to himself an
increase of fame, and the living would fain appear more glorious by the help of
that which has no life. Do you see the excess of his madness; how, thinking to do
honor, he rather offered insult, to himself? For when it appears that he is relying
rather on the lifeless thing, than on himself and the soul that lives in him, and
when for this cause he advances the stock unto such high precedence, how can
he be other than ridiculous, endeavoring as he does to adorn himself, not by his
way of living, but by planks of wood? Just as if a man should think proper to
give himself airs, because of the pavement of his house, and his beautiful
staircase rather than because he is a man. Him do many too among us imitate
now. For as he for his image, so some men claim to be admired for their clothes,
others for their house; or for their mules and chariots, and for the columns in
their house. For inasmuch as they have lost their being as men, they go about
gathering to themselves from other quarters such glory as is full of exceeding

ridicule.
But as to the noble and great servants of God, not by these means, but by
such as best became them, even by such did they shine forth. For captives as
they were, and slaves, and youths, and strangers, and stripped of all resources of
their own, they proved at that time far more awful than he who was invested
with all these things. And while Nebuchadnezzar found neither so great an
image, nor satraps, nor captains of the host, nor endless legions, nor abundance
of gold, nor other pomp, enough to meet his desire, and to show him great; to
these, on the other hand, stripped of all this, their high self-restraint alone was
sufficient, and showed him that wore the diadem and the purple, as much inferior
in glory to those who had no such thing, as the sun is more glorious than a pearl.
For they were led forth in the midst of the whole world, being at once youths,
and captives, and slaves, and straightway on their appearance the king darted fire
from his eyes, and captains, and deputies, and governors, and the whole
amphitheatre of the devil, stood around; and a voice of pipes from all sides, and
of trumpets, and of all music, borne up to Heaven, was sounding in their ears,
and the furnace burned up to a boundless height, and the flame reached the very
clouds, and all was full of terror and dismay. But none of these things dismayed
them, but they laughed it all to scorn, as they would children mocking them, and
exhibited their courage and meekness, and uttering a voice clearer than those
trumpets, they said, "Be it known unto you, O king." [Daniel 3:18] For they did
not wish to affront the king, no not so much as by a word, but to declare their
religion only. For which cause, neither did they extend their speech to any great
length, but set forth all briefly; "For there is," say they, "a God in Heaven, who
is able to deliver us," [Daniel 3:17] "why do you show me the multitude? Why
the furnace? Why the sharpened swords? Why the terrible guards? Our Lord is
higher and more mighty than all these."
Then when they considered that it was possible that God might be willing
even to permit them to be burnt; lest, if this should come to pass, they might
seem to be speaking falsehoods; they add this also and say, "If this happen not,