THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.6.

to the first uttering of these words by Christ; since it is evident that
then they were employed, not materially, but significatively. And
therefore it must be said that even when spoken by the priest they
are taken significatively, and not merely materially. Nor does it
matter that the priest pronounces them by way of recital, as though
they were spoken by Christ, because owing to Christ's infinite
power, just as through contact with His flesh the regenerative power
entered not only into the waters which came into contact with Christ,
but into all waters throughout the whole world and during all future
ages, so likewise from Christ's uttering these words they derived
their consecrating power, by whatever priest they be uttered, as if
Christ present were saying them.
And therefore others have said that in this phrase the word "this"
appeals, not to the senses, but to the intellect; so that the meaning
is, "This is My body"---i.e. "The thing signified by 'this' is My body."
But neither can this stand, because, since in the sacraments the
effect is that which is signified, from such a form it would not result
that Christ's body was in very truth in this sacrament, but merely as
in a sign, which is heretical, as stated above (Question 85, Article 1).
Consequently, others have said that the word "this" appeals to the
senses; not at the precise instant of its being uttered, but merely at
the last instant thereof; as when a man says, "Now I am silent," this
adverb "now" points to the instant immediately following the speech:
because the sense is: "Directly these words are spoken I am silent."
But neither can this hold good, because in that case the meaning of
the sentence would be: "My body is My body," which the above
phrase does not effect, because this was so even before the
utterance of the words: hence neither does the aforesaid sentence
mean this.
Consequently, then, it remains to be said, as stated above (Article 4),
that this sentence possesses the power of effecting the conversion
of the bread into the body of Christ. And therefore it is compared to
other sentences, which have power only of signifying and not of
producing, as the concept of the practical intellect, which is
productive of the thing, is compared to the concept of our
speculative intellect which is drawn from things. because "words are
signs of concepts," as the Philosopher says (Peri Herm. i). And
therefore as the concept of the practical intellect does not
presuppose the thing understood, but makes it, so the truth of this
expression does not presuppose the thing signified, but makes it; for

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.6.

such is the relation of God's word to the things made by the Word.
Now this change takes place not successively, but in an instant, as
stated above (Question 77, Article 7). Consequently one must
understand the aforesaid expression with reference to the last
instant of the words being spoken, yet not so that the subject may be
understood to have stood for that which is the term of the
conversion; viz. that the body of Christ is the body of Christ; nor
again that the subject be understood to stand for that which it was
before the conversion, namely, the bread. but for that which is
commonly related to both, i.e. that which is contained in general
under those species. For these words do not make the body of
Christ to be the body of Christ, nor do they make the bread to be the
body of Christ; but what was contained under those species, and
was formerly bread, they make to be the body of Christ. And
therefore expressly our Lord did not say: "This bread is My body,"
which would be the meaning of the second opinion; nor "This My
body is My body," which would be the meaning of the third opinion:
but in general: "This is My body," assigning no noun on the part of
the subject, but only a pronoun, which signifies substance in
common, without quality, that is, without a determinate form.
Reply to Objection 1: The term "this" points to a substance, yet
without determining its proper nature, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: The pronoun "this" does not indicate the
accidents, but the substance underlying the accidents, which at first
was bread, and is afterwards the body of Christ, which body,
although not informed by those accidents, is yet contained under
them.
Reply to Objection 3: The meaning of this expression is, in the order
of nature, understood before the thing signified, just as a cause is
naturally prior to the effect; but not in order of time, because this
cause has its effect with it at the same time, and this suffices for the
truth of the expression.