the man who was his enemy, and had given him pain just as if he was some
benefactor, and had done him much good. What kind of indulgence then shall we
have, if we are mindful of past transgressions, and avenge ourselves on those
who have given us pain, whereas that innocent man who had undergone such
great sufferings and expected more and worse evils to befall him in consequence
of saving his enemy, is seen to spare him, so as to prefer incurring danger
himself and to live in fear and trembling, rather than put to a just death the man
who would cause him endless troubles?
His moral wisdom then we may perceive, not only from the fact that he did
not slay Saul, when there was so strong a compulsion, but also that he did not
utter an irreverent word against him, although he who was insulted would not
have heard him. Yet we often speak evil of friends when they are absent, he on
the contrary not even of the enemy who had done him such great wrong. His
moral wisdom then we may perceive from these things: but his lovingkindness
and tender care from what he did after these things. For when he had cut off the
fringe of Saul's garment, and had taken away the bottle of water he withdrew
afar off and stood and shouted, and exhibited these things to him whose life he
had preserved, doing so not with a view to display and ostentation, but desiring
to convince him by his deeds that he suspected him without a cause as his
enemy, and aiming therefore at winning him into friendship. Nevertheless when
he had even thus failed to persuade him, and could have laid hands on him, he
again chose rather to be an exile from his country and to sojourn in a strange
land, and suffer distress every day, in procuring necessary food than to remain at
home and vex his adversary. What spirit could be kinder than his? He was indeed
justified in saying "Lord remember David and all his meekness." Let us also
imitate him, and let us neither say nor do evil to our enemies, but benefit them
according to our power: for we shall do more good to ourselves than to them.
"For if you forgive your enemies," we are told "you shall be forgiven."
[Matthew 6:14] Forgive base offenses that you may receive a royal pardon for
your offenses; but if any one has done you great wrongs, the greater the wrongs

you forgive, the greater will be the pardon which you will receive. Therefore we
have been instructed to say "Forgive us, as we forgive," that we may learn that
the measure of our forgiveness takes its beginning in the first place from
ourselves. Wherefore in proportion to the severity of the evil which the enemy
does to us is the greatness of the benefit which he bestows. Let us then be
earnest and eager to be reconciled with those who have vexed us, whether their
wrath be just or unjust. For if you are reconciled here, you are delivered from
judgment in the other world; but if in the interval while the hatred is still going
on, death interrupting steps in and carries the enmity away with it, it follows of
necessity that the trial of the case should be brought forward in the other world.
As then many men when they have a dispute with one another, if they come to a
friendly understanding together outside the law court save themselves loss, and
alarm, and many risks, the issue of the case turning out in accordance with the
sentiment of each party; but if they severally entrust the affair to the judge the
only result to them will be loss of money, and in many cases a penalty, and the
permanent endurance of their hatred; even so here if we come to terms during
our present life we shall relieve ourselves from all punishment; but if while
remaining enemies we depart to that terrible tribunal in the other world we shall
certainly pay the utmost penalty at the sentence of the judge there, and shall both
of us undergo inexorable punishment: he who is unjustly angry because he is
thus unjustly disposed, and he who is justly angry, because he has, however
justly, cherished resentment. For even if we have been unjustly ill-treated, we
ought to grant pardon to those who have wronged us. And observe how he urges
and incites those who have unjustly given pain to reconciliation with those
whom they have wronged. "If you offer your gift before the altar, and there
rememberest that your brother has ought against you, go your way; first be
reconciled to your brother." [Matthew 5:23-24] He did not say, "assemble, and
offer your sacrifice" but "be reconciled and then offer it." Let it lie there, he
says, in order that the necessity of making the offering may constrain him who is
justly angry to come to terms even against his will. See how he again prompts us