determine the circumstances, when, how, what, and to whom, with
regard to the confession of which we are speaking now. Accordingly
it is evident that the natural law inclines a man to confession, by
means of the Divine law, which determines the circumstances, as is
the case with all matters belonging to the positive law.
Reply to Objection 2: Although an innocent man may have the habit
of the virtue whose object is a sin already committed, he has not the
act, so long as he remains innocent. Wherefore the confession of
sins, of which confession we are speaking now, is not befitting an
innocent man, though it is an act of virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Though the grace of the sacraments differs
from the grace of the virtues, they are not contrary but disparate;
hence there is nothing to prevent that which is an act of virtue, in so
far as it proceeds from the free-will quickened by grace, from being a
sacrament, or part of a sacrament, in so far as it is ordained as a
remedy for sin.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether confession is an act of the virtue of

penance?
Objection 1: It would seem that confession is not an act of the virtue
of penance. For an act belongs to the virtue which is its cause. Now
the cause of confession is the hope of pardon, as appears from the
definition given above (Article 1). Therefore it seems that it is an act
of hope and not of penance.
Objection 2: Further, shame is a part of temperance. But confession
arises from shame, as appears in the definition given above (Article
1, Objection 4). Therefore it is an act of temperance and not of
penance.
Objection 3: Further, the act of penance leans on Divine mercy. But
confession leans rather on Divine wisdom, by reason of the truth
which is required in it. Therefore it is not an act of penance.
Objection 4: Further, we are moved to penance by the article of the
Creed which is about the Judgment, on account of fear, which is the
origin of penance. But we are moved to confession by the article
which is about life everlasting, because it arises from hope of
pardon. Therefore it is not an act of penance.
Objection 5: Further, it belongs to the virtue of truth that a man
shows himself to be what he is. But this is what a man does when he
goes to confession. Therefore confession is an act of that virtue
which is called truth, and not of penance.
On the contrary, Penance is ordained for the destruction of sin. Now
confession is ordained to this also. Therefore it is an act of penance.
I answer that, It must be observed with regard to virtues, that when a
special reason of goodness or difficulty is added over and above the
object of a virtue, there is need of a special virtue: thus the
expenditure of large sums is the object of magnificence, although
the ordinary kind of average expenditure and gifts belongs to
liberality, as appears from Ethic. ii, 7; iv, 1. The same applies to the
confession of truth, which, although it belongs to the virtue of truth
absolutely, yet, on account of the additional reason of goodness,
begins to belong to another kind of virtue. Hence the Philosopher