harm to any one; but if it is overcome by rage, and breaks through the
intervening bars, and is able to leap out, it fills the city with all sorts of confusion
and disturbance, and puts everybody to flight. Such indeed is the nature also of
bile. As long as it is kept within its proper limits, it will do us no great mischief;
but as soon as ever the membrane that incloses it bursts, and there is nothing to
hinder its being at once dispersed over the whole system, then, I say, at that
moment, though it be so very trifling in quantity, yet by reason of the inordinate
strength of its quality it taints all the other elements of our nature with its own
peculiar virulence. For finding the blood, for instance, near to it, alike in place
and in quality, and rendering the heat which is in that blood more acrid, and
everything else in fact which is near it; passing from its just temperature it
overflows its bounds, turns all into gall, and therewith at once attacks likewise
the other parts of the body; and thus infusing into all its own poisonous quality, it
renders the man speechless, and causes him to expire, expelling life. Now, why
have I stated all these things with such minuteness? It is in order that,
understanding from this bitterness which is of the body the intolerable evil of
that bitterness which is of the soul, and how entirely it destroys first of all the
very soul that engenders it, making everything bitter, we may escape experience
of it. For as the one inflames the whole constitution, so does the other the
thoughts, and carries away its captive to the abyss of hell. In order then that by
carefully examining these matters we may escape this evil, and bridle the
monster, or rather utterly root it out, let us hearken to what Paul says, "Let all
bitterness be" (not destroyed, but) "put away" from you. For what need have I of
trouble to restrain it, what necessity is there to keep watch on a monster, when it
is in my power to expel him from my soul, to remove him and drive him out, as
it were, into banishment? Let us hearken then to Paul when he says, "Let all
bitterness be put away from you." But, ah, the perversity that possesses us!
Though we ought to do everything to effect this, yet are there some so truly
senseless as to congratulate themselves upon this evil, and to pride themselves
upon it, and to glory in it, and who are envied by others. "Such a one," say they,

"is a bitter man, he is a scorpion, a serpent, a viper." They look upon him as one
to be feared. But wherefore, good man, do you fear the bitter person? "I fear,"
you say, "lest he injure me, lest he destroy me; I am not proof against his malice,
I am afraid lest he should take me who am a simple man, and unable to foresee
any of his schemes, and throw me into his snares, and entangle us in the toils
which he has set to deceive us." Now I cannot but smile. And why forsooth?
Because these are the arguments of children, who fear things which are not to be
feared. Surely there is nothing we ought so to despise, nothing we ought so to
laugh to scorn, as a bitter and malicious man. For there is nothing so powerless
as bitterness. It makes men fools and senseless.
Do ye not see that malice is blind? Have ye never heard, that he that digs a
pit for his neighbors, digs it for himself? How, it may be said, ought we not to
fear a soul full of tumult? If indeed we are to fear the bitter in the same way as
we fear evil spirits, and fools and madmen, (for they indeed do everything at
random,) I grant it myself; but if we are to fear them as men skillful in the
conduct of affairs, that never. For nothing is so necessary for the proper conduct
of affairs as prudence; and there is no greater hindrance to prudence than
wickedness, and malice, and hollowness. Look at bilious persons, how unsightly
they are, with all their bloom withered away. How weak they are, and puny, and
unfit for anything. So also are souls of this nature. What else is wickedness, but a
jaundice of the soul? Wickedness then has no strength in it, indeed it has not.
Have ye a mind that I again make what I am saying plain to you by an instance,
by setting before you the portraits of a treacherous and a guileless man?
Absalom was a treacherous man, and "stole all men's hearts." [2 Samuel 15:6]
And observe how great was his treachery. "He went about," it says, "and said,
'Have you no judgment.'" wishing to conciliate every one to himself. But David
was guileless. What then? Look at the end of them both, look, how full of utter
madness was the former! For inasmuch as he looked solely to the hurt of his
father, in all other things he was blinded. But not so David. For "he that walks
uprightly, walks surely" [Proverbs 10:9]; and reasonably; he is one that manages