anything. And thou indeed art forgiving a fellow-servant; whereas God is
forgiving a servant, and an enemy, and one that hates Him.
"Even as God," says he, "also in Christ forgave you."
And this, moreover, contains a high allusion. Not simply, he would say, has
He forgiven us, and at no risk or cost, but at the sacrifice of His Son; for that He
might forgive you, He sacrificed the Son; whereas thou, oftentimes, even when
you see pardon to be both without risk and without cost, yet dost not grant it.
"Be therefore imitators of God as beloved children; and walk in love, even
as Christ also loved you, and gave Himself up for us an offering and sacrifice to
God for an odor of a sweet smell."
That you may not then think it an act of necessity, hear how He says, that
"He gave Himself up." As your Master loved you, love thou your friend. Nay,
but neither will you be able so to love; yet still do so as far as you are able. Oh,
what can be more blessed than a sound like this! Tell me of royalty or whatever
else you will, there is no comparison. Forgive another, and you are "imitating
God," you are made like God. It is more our duty to forgive trespasses than debts
of money; for if you forgive debts, you have not "imitated God"; whereas if you
shall forgive trespasses, you are "imitating God." And yet how shall you be able
to say, "I am poor, and am not able to forgive it," that is, a debt, when you
forgive not that which you are able to forgive, that is, a trespass? And surely
thou dost not deem that in this case there is any loss. Yea, is it not rather wealth,
is it not abundance, is it not a plentiful store?
And behold yet another and a nobler incitement: — "as beloved children,"
says he. You have yet another cogent reason to imitate Him, not only in that you
have received such good at His hands, but also in that you are called His
children. And since not all children imitate their fathers, but those which are
beloved, therefore he says, "as beloved children."
Ver. 2. "Walk in love."
Behold, here, the groundwork of all! So then where this is, there is no
"wrath, no anger, no clamor, no railing," but all are done away. Accordingly he

puts the chief point last. Whence were you made a child? Because you were
forgiven. On the same ground on which you have had so vast a privilege vouchsafed you, on that selfsame ground forgive your neighbor. Tell me, I say, if you
were in prison, and had ten thousand misdeeds to answer for, and some one were
to bring you into the palace; or rather to pass over this argument, suppose thou
were in a fever and in the agonies of death, and some one were to benefit you by
some medicine, would you not value him more than all, yea and the very name
of the medicine? For if we thus regard occasions and places by which we are
benefited, even as our own souls, much more shall we the things themselves. Be
a lover then of love; for by this are you saved, by this have you been made a son.
And if you shall have it in your power to save another, will you not use the same
remedy, and give the advice to all, "Forgive, that you may be forgiven"? Thus to
incite one another, were the part of grateful, of generous, and noble spirits.
"Even as Christ also," he adds, "loved you."
You are only sparing friends, He enemies. So then far greater is that boon
which comes from our Master. For how in our case is the "even as" preserved.
Surely it is clear that it will be, by our doing good to our enemies.
"And gave Himself up for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for an odor
of a sweet smell."
Do you see that to suffer for one's enemies is "a sweet-smelling savor," and
an "acceptable sacrifice"? And if you shall die, then will you be indeed a
sacrifice. This it is to "imitate God."
Ver. 3. "But fornication, and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not even
be named among you, as becomes saints."
He has spoken of the bitter passion, of wrath; he now comes to the lesser
evil: for that lust is the lesser evil, hear how Moses also in the law says, first,
"You shall do no murder" [Exodus 20:13], which is the work of wrath, and then,
"You shall not commit adultery" [Exodus 20:14], which is of lust. For as
"bitterness," and "clamor," and "all malice," and "railing," and the like, are the
works of the passionate man, so likewise are "fornication, uncleanness,