against him: for it was not the same thing his simply coming there, and his
coming on such a cause. For, in fact this was what made the Jews come together
there. [Acts 28:17] Then again, some time passes while he tarries at Jerusalem,
that you may learn, that, though some time passed, the evil design against him
prevails nothing, God not permitting it. But this king Agrippa, who was also a
Herod, was a different Agrippa, after him of James' time, so that this is the fourth
(Herod). See how his enemies coöperate with him against their will. To make the
audience large, Agrippa falls into a desire of hearing: and he does not simply
hear, but with much parade. And see what a vindication ([απολογιαν])! So writes
Festus, and the ruthlessness of the Jews is openly made a show of: for when it is
the governor that says these things, he is a witness above all suspicion: so that
the Jews are condemned by him also. For, when all had pronounced sentence
against them, then, and not sooner, God brings upon them the punishment. But
observe: Lysias gave it against them, Felix against them, Festus against them—
although he wished to gratify them — Agrippa against them. What further? The
Pharisees— even they gave it against themselves. No evil, says Festus, "of such
things as I supposed: no accusation did they bring against him." [Acts 25:18]
And yet they did bring it: true, but they did not prove it: for their evil design and
daring plot against him gave cause to surmise this, but the examination brought
out nothing of the kind. "And of one Jesus," he says, "which was dead." [Acts
25:19] He says naturally enough, "of one" (Jesus), as being a man in office, and
not caring for these things. "And not knowing, for my part, what to make of the
enquiry concerning these things" [Acts 25:20]— of course, it went beyond a
judge's hearing, the examining into these matters. If you are at a loss, why do
you drag him to Jerusalem? But the other would not deign this: no, "To Cæsar"
(says he); as in fact it was touching Cæsar that they accused him. Do you hear
the appeal? Hear the plotting of the Jews? Hear their factious spirit? All these
things provoked him to a desire (of hearing him): and he gives them the
gratification and Paul becomes more renowned. For such as I said, are the ill
designs (of enemies). Had not these things been so, none of these rulers would

have deigned to hear him, none would have heard with such quietness and
silence. And he seems indeed to be teaching, he seems to be making a defence;
but he rather makes a public harangue with much orderliness. Then let us not
think that ill designs against us are a grievous thing. So long as we do not make
ill designs against ourselves, no one will be able to have ill designs against us: or
rather, people may do this, but they do us no hurt; nay, even benefit us in the
highest degree: for it rests with ourselves, whether we shall suffer evil, or not
suffer evil. Lo! I testify, and proclaim with a loud voice, more piercing even than
the sound of a trumpet— and were it possible to ascend on high and cry aloud, I
would not shrink from doing it— him that is a Christian, none of all the human
beings that inhabit the earth will have power to hurt. And why do I say, human
beings? Not even the Evil Spirit himself, the tyrant, the Devil, can do this, unless
the man injure himself; be what it may that any one works, in vain he works it.
For even as no human being could hurt an angel, if he were on earth, so neither
can one human being hurt another human being. But neither again will he
himself be able to hurt another, so long as he is good. What then can be equal to
this, when neither to be hurt is possible, nor to hurt another? For this thing is not
less than the former, the not wishing to hurt another. Why, that man is a kind of
angel, yea, like God. For such is God; only, He indeed (is such) by nature, but
this man, by moral choice: neither to be hurt is possible (for either), nor to hurt
another. But this thing, this "not possible," think not that it is for any want of
power— for the contrary to this is want of power— no, I speak of the morally
incompatible ([τὸ ἀνενδεκτόν]). For the (Divine) Nature is neither Itself
susceptible of hurt, nor capable of hurting another: since this very thing in itself
is a hurt. For in no other way do we hurt ourselves, than by hurting another, and
our greatest sins become such from our doing injury to ourselves. So that for this
reason also the Christian cannot be hurt, namely, because neither can he hurt.
But how in hurting others we hurt ourselves, come, let us take this saying in
hand for examination in detail. Let a man wrong another, insult, overreach;
whom then has he hurt? Is it not himself first? This is plain to every one. For to