ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 13 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts 5:17-18
"Then having risen up, the high-priest and they that were with him (which is
the sect of the Sadducees) were filled with indignation, and laid their hands on
the Apostles, and put them in the common prison."
"Having risen up," that is, being roused, being excited at the things taking
place, the high-priest and they which were with him (which is the sect of the
Sadducees) were filled with indignation, and laid their hands on the Apostles:
they now assault them more vigorously: "and put them in the common prison;"
but did not immediately bring them to trial, because they expected them again to
be softened down. "But the Angel of the Lord opened the prison doors, and
brought them forth, and said, Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all
the words of this life." "And when they heard that, they entered into the temple
early in the morning, and taught." [Acts 5:19-21] This was done both for the
encouragement of the disciples, and for the benefit and instruction of the others.
And observe how the proceeding in the present instance is just the same as in
what Christ Himself did. Namely, in His miracles though He does not let men
see them in the act of being wrought, He furnishes the means whereby they may
be apprised of the things wrought: thus, in His Resurrection, He did not let them
see how He rose: in the water made wine, the guests do not see it done, for they
have been drinking much, and the discernment He leaves to others. Just so in the
present case, they do not see them in the act of being brought forth, but the
proofs from which they might gather what had been done, they do see. And it
was by night that the Angel put them forth. Why was this? Because in this way
they were more believed than they would have been in the other: so, people
would not even have had occasion to put the question: they would not in some
other way have believed. So it was in the old times, in the case of

Nebuchadnezzar: he saw them praising God in the furnace, and then indeed he
was put in amazement. [Daniel 3:24] Whereas then these priests ought as their
first question to have asked, How did you come out? Instead of this, as if nothing
had happened, they ask, "Did we not strictly charge you not to speak?" [Acts
5:28] And observe, by report of others they are apprised of all the circumstances:
they see the prison remaining closed with safety, and the guards standing before
the doors. A twofold security this; as was the case at the sepulchre, where was
both the seal, and the men to watch. See how they fought against God! Say, was
this of man's doing, that happened to them? Who led them forth, when the doors
were shut? How came they out, with the keepers standing before the door?
Verily they must be mad or drunken to talk so. Here are men, whom neither
prison, nor bonds, nor closed doors, had been able to keep in; and yet they
expect to overpower them: such is their childish folly! Their officers come and
confess what has taken place, as if on purpose to debar them from all show of
reason. Do you mark how there is miracle upon miracle, differing in kind, some
wrought by them, others on them, and these more illustrious than the others?
"And when they heard that, they entered into the temple early in the morning,
and taught. But the high-priest came, and they that were with him, and called the
council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the
prison to have them brought. But when the officers came, and found them not in
the prison, they returned, and told, saying, The prison truly found we shut with
all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors: but when we had
opened, we found no man within. Now when the high-priest and the captain of
the temple and the chief priests heard these things, they doubted of them
whereunto this would grow." [Acts 5:21-25] It is well ordered that the
information was not brought to them at once, but they are first utterly at a loss
what to think, that when they have considered it well and seen that there is a
Divine Power in the case, then they may learn the whole state of the case. "Then
came one, and told them, saying, Behold, the men whom you put in prison are
standing in the temple, and teaching the people. Then went the captain with the