divulge a confession.
On the contrary, The Decretal says (De Poenit. et Remiss., Cap.
Omnis utriusque): "Let the priest beware lest he betray the sinner, by
word, or sign, or in any other way whatever."
Further, the priest should conform himself to God, Whose minister
he is. But God does not reveal the sins which are made known to
Him in confession, but hides them. Neither, therefore, should the
priest reveal them.
I answer that, Those things which are done outwardly in the
sacraments are the signs of what takes place inwardly: wherefore
confession, whereby a man subjects himself to a priest, is a sign of
the inward submission, whereby one submits to God. Now God
hides the sins of those who submit to Him by Penance; wherefore
this also should be signified in the sacrament of Penance, and
consequently the sacrament demands that the confession should
remain hidden, and he who divulges a confession sins by violating
the sacrament. Besides this there are other advantages in this
secrecy, because thereby men are more attracted to confession, and
confess their sins with greater simplicity.
Reply to Objection 1: Some say that the priest is not bound by the
seal of confession to hide other sins than those in respect of which
the penitent promises amendment; otherwise he may reveal them to
one who can be a help and not a hindrance. But this opinion seems
erroneous, since it is contrary to the truth of the sacrament; for just
as, though the person baptized be insincere, yet his Baptism is a
sacrament, and there is no change in the essentials of the sacrament
on that account, so confession does not cease to be sacramental
although he that confesses, does not purpose amendment.
Therefore, this notwithstanding, it must be held secret; nor does the
seal of confession militate against charity on that account, because
charity does not require a man to find a remedy for a sin which he
knows not: and that which is known in confession, is, as it were,
unknown, since a man knows it, not as man, but as God knows it.
Nevertheless in the cases quoted one should apply some kind of
remedy, so far as this can be done without divulging the confession,
e.g. by admonishing the penitent, and by watching over the others
lest they be corrupted by heresy. He can also tell the prelate to watch
over his flock with great care, yet so as by neither word nor sign to
betray the penitent.

Reply to Objection 2: The precept concerning the secret of
confession follows from the sacrament itself. Wherefore just as the
obligation of making a sacramental confession is of Divine law, so
that no human dispensation or command can absolve one therefrom,
even so, no man can be forced or permitted by another man to
divulge the secret of confession. Consequently if he be commanded
under pain of excommunication to be incurred "ipso facto," to say
whether he knows anything about such and such a sin, he ought not
to say it, because he should assume that the intention of the person
in commanding him thus, was that he should say what he knew as
man. And even if he were expressly interrogated about a confession,
he ought to say nothing, nor would he incur the excommunication,
for he is not subject to his superior, save as a man, and he knows
this not as a man, but as God knows it.
Reply to Objection 3: A man is not called upon to witness except as
a man, wherefore without wronging his conscience he can swear
that he knows not, what he knows only as God knows it. In like
manner a superior can, without wronging his conscience, leave a sin
unpunished which he knows only as God knows it, or he may forbear
to apply a remedy, since he is not bound to apply a remedy, except
according as it comes to his knowledge. Wherefore with regard to
matters which come to his knowledge in the tribunal of Penance, he
should apply the remedy, as far as he can, in the same court: thus as
to the case in point, the abbot should advise the prior to resign his
office, and if the latter refuse, he can absolve him from the priorship
on some other occasion, yet so as to avoid all suspicion of divulging
the confession.
Reply to Objection 4: A man is rendered unworthy of ecclesiastical
preferment, by many other causes besides sin, for instance, by lack
of knowledge, age, or the like: so that by raising an objection one
does not raise a suspicion of crime or divulge the secret of
confession.