despise riches, to be meek, and the like. But the adulterer, the fornicator, the
defrauder, ought to be brought to a better course by command. And those who
are addicted to augury and divination, and the like, should be corrected "with all
authority." Observe how he would have him insist on these things with
independence, and with entire freedom.
"Let no man despise you." But
Chap. iii. 1. "Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to
obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be
no brawlers."
What then? Even when men do evil, may we not revile them? Nay, but "to
be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man." Hear the exhortation, "To
speak evil of no man." Our lips should be pure from reviling. For if our
reproaches are true, it is not for us to utter them, but for the Judge to enquire into
the matter. "For why," he says, "do you judge your brother?" [Romans 14:10]
But if they are not true, how great the fire. Hear what the thief says to his fellowthief. "For we are also in the same condemnation." [Luke 23:40] We are running
the same hazard. If you revile others, you will soon fall into the same sins.
Therefore the blessed Paul admonishes us: "Let him that stands, take heed lest he
fall." [1 Corinthians 10:12]
"To be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men."
Unto Greeks and Jews, to the wicked and the evil. For when he says, "Let
him that stands take heed lest he fall," he wakens their fears from the future; but
here, on the contrary, he exhorts them from the consideration of the past, and the
same in what follows;
Ver. 3. "For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish."
Thus also he does in his Epistle to the Galatians, where he says, "Even so
we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of the world."
[Galatians 4:4] Therefore he says, Revile no one, for such also you were
yourself.
"For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,

serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and
hating one another."
Therefore we ought to be thus to all, to be gently disposed. For he who was
formerly in such a state, and has been delivered from it, ought not to reproach
others, but to pray, to be thankful to Him who has granted both to him and them
deliverance from such evils. Let no one boast; for all have sinned. If then, doing
well yourself, you are inclined to revile others, consider your own former life,
and the uncertainty of the future, and restrain your anger. For if you have lived
virtuously from your earliest youth, yet nevertheless you may have many sins;
and if you have not, as you think, consider that this is not the effect of your
virtue, but of the grace of God. For if He had not called your forefathers, you
would have been disobedient. See here how he mentions every sort of
wickedness. How many things has not God dispensed by the Prophets and all
other means? Have we heard?
"For we," he says, "were once deceived."
Ver. 4. "But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man
appeared." How? "Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to His mercy He saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost."
Strange! How were we drowned in wickedness, so that we could not be
purified, but needed a new birth? For this is implied by "Regeneration." For as
when a house is in a ruinous state no one places props under it, nor makes any
addition to the old building, but pulls it down to its foundations, and rebuilds it
anew; so in our case, God has not repaired us, but has made us anew. For this is
"the renewing of the Holy Ghost." He has made us new men. How? "By His
Spirit"; and to show this further, he adds,
Ver. 6. "Which He shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our
Saviour."
Thus we need the Spirit abundantly.
"That being justified by His grace"— again by grace and not by debt— "we