THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.2.

reproved: because 'you will believe in Me whom you shall not see.'"
Secondly, to uplift our hope: hence He says (Jn. 14:3): "If I shall go,
and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and will take you to
Myself; that where I am, you also may be." For by placing in heaven
the human nature which He assumed, Christ gave us the hope of
going thither; since "wheresoever the body shall be, there shall the
eagles also be gathered together," as is written in Mt. 24:28. Hence it
is written likewise (Mic. 2:13): "He shall go up that shall open the way
before them."
Thirdly, in order to direct the fervor of our charity to heavenly things.
Hence the Apostle says (Col. 3:1,2): "Seek the things that are above,
where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God. Mind the things that
are above, not the things that are upon the earth": for as is said (Mt.
6:21): "Where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also." And since the
Holy Ghost is love drawing us up to heavenly things, therefore our
Lord said to His disciples (Jn. 16:7): "It is expedient to you that I go;
for if I go not, the Paraclete will not come to you; but if I go, I will
send Him to you." On which words Augustine says (Tract. xciv super
Joan.): "Ye cannot receive the Spirit, so long as ye persist in
knowing Christ according to the flesh. But when Christ withdrew in
body, not only
the Holy Ghost, but both Father and Son were present with them
spiritually."
Reply to Objection 4: Although a heavenly place befitted Christ when
He rose to immortal life, nevertheless He delayed the Ascension in
order to confirm the truth of His Resurrection. Hence it is written
(Acts 1:3), that "He showed Himself alive after His Passion, by many
proofs, for forty days appearing to them": upon which the gloss says
that "because He was dead for forty hours, during forty days He
established the fact of His being alive again. Or the forty days may
be understood as a figure of this world, wherein Christ dwells in His
Church: inasmuch as man is made out of the four elements, and is
cautioned not to transgress the Decalogue."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.2.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ's Ascension into heaven belonged

to Him according to His Divine Nature?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Ascension into heaven
belonged to Him according to His Divine Nature. For, it is written (Ps.
46:6): "God is ascended with jubilee": and (Dt. 33:26): "He that is
mounted upon the heaven is thy helper." But these words were
spoken of God even before Christ's Incarnation. Therefore it belongs
to Christ to ascend into heaven as God.
Objection 2: Further, it belongs to the same person to ascend into
heaven as to descend from heaven, according to Jn. 3:13: "No man
hath ascended into heaven, but He that descended from heaven":
and Eph. 4:10: "He that descended is the same also that ascended."
But Christ came down from heaven not as man, but as God: because
previously His Nature in heaven was not human, but Divine.
Therefore it seems that Christ ascended into heaven as God.
Objection 3: Further, by His Ascension Christ ascended to the
Father. But it was not as man that He rose to equality with the
Father; for in this respect He says: "He is greater than I," as is said in
Jn. 14:28. Therefore it seems that Christ ascended as God.
On the contrary, on Eph. 4:10: "That He ascended, what is it, but
because He also descended," a gloss says: "It is clear that He
descended and ascended according to His humanity."
I answer that, The expression "according to" can denote two things;
the condition of the one who ascends, and the cause of his
ascension. When taken to express the condition of the one
ascending, the Ascension in no wise belongs to Christ according to
the condition of His Divine Nature; both because there is nothing
higher than the Divine Nature to which He can ascend; and because
ascension is local motion, a thing not in keeping with the Divine
Nature, which is immovable and outside all place. Yet the Ascension
is in keeping with Christ according to His human nature, which is
limited by place, and can be the subject of motion. In this sense,
then, we can say that Christ ascended into heaven as man, but not
as God.
But if the phrase "according to" denote the cause of the Ascension,