both by putting away their diseases, and by doing nought for display. Because
they indeed were cleaving unto Him, loving Him, and marvelling at Him, and
desiring to look upon Him. For who would depart from one who was doing such
miracles? Who would not long, were it only to see the face, and the mouth that
was uttering such words?
For not by any means in working wonders only was He wonderful, but even
when merely showing Himself, He was full of great grace; and to declare this the
prophet said, "Fair in beauty beyond the children of men." And if Esaias says,
"He has no form nor comeliness," he affirms it either in comparison of the glory
of His Godhead, which surpasses all utterance and description; or as declaring
what took place at His passion, and the dishonor which He underwent at the
season of the cross, and the mean estate which throughout His life He
exemplified in all respects.
Further: He did not first give "commandment to depart unto the other side,"
nor until He had healed them. For surely they could not have borne it. As
therefore on the mountain they not only continued with Him while exhorting
them, but also when it was silence followed Him; so here too, not in His
miracles only did they wait on Him, but also when He had ceased again, from
His very countenance receiving no small benefit. For if Moses had his face made
glorious, and Stephen like that of an angel; consider thou our common Lord,
what manner of person it was likely He would appear at such a time.
Many now perchance have fallen into a passionate desire of seeing that
form; but if we are willing we shall behold one far better than that. For if we can
pass through our present life with Christian boldness, we shall receive Him in
the clouds, meeting Him in an immortal and incorruptible body.
But observe how He does not simply drive them away, lest He should hurt
them. For He did not say, "withdraw," but "gave commandment to depart to the
other side," giving them to expect that He would surely come there.
4. And the multitudes for their part evinced this great love, and were
following with much affection; but some one person, a slave of wealth, and

possessed with much arrogance, approaches Him, and says,
"Master, I will follow You wherever You go." [Matthew 8:19]
Do you see how great his arrogance? For as not deigning to be numbered
with the multitude, and indicating that he is above the common sort, so he comes
near. Because such is the Jewish character; full of unseasonable confidence. So
too another afterwards, when all men were keeping silence, of his own accord
springs up, and says, "Which is the first commandment?"
Yet nevertheless the Lord rebuked not his unseasonable confidence,
teaching us to bear even with such as these. Therefore He does not openly
convict them who are devising mischief, but replies to their secret thought,
leaving it to themselves only to know that they are convicted, and doubly doing
them good, first by showing that He knows what is in their conscience, next by
granting unto them concealment after this manifestation, and allowing them to
recover themselves again, if they will: which thing He does in the case of this
man also.
For he, seeing the many signs, and many drawn after Him, thought to make
a gain out of such miracles; wherefore also he was forward to follow Him. And
whence is this manifest? From the answer which Christ makes, meeting not the
question, as it stands verbally, but the temper shown in its meaning. For,
"What?" says He, "do you look to gather wealth by following me? Do you see
not then that I have not even a lodging, not even so much as the birds have?"
For "the foxes," says He, "have holes, and the birds of the air have nests,
but the Son of Man has not where to lay His head." [Matthew 8:20]
Now these were not the words of one turning Himself away, but of one who
while putting to the proof his evil disposition, yet permitted him (if he were
willing with such a prospect) to follow Him. And to convince you of his
wickedness, when he had heard these things, and had been proved, he did not
say, "I am ready to follow You."
5. And in many other places also Christ is clearly doing this; He does not
openly convict, but by His answer He manifests the purpose of them that are