Col. i. 18.

receiving the prophetic gift from the same Word, announced His advent according to the flesh, by
which the blending and communion of God and man took place according to the good pleasure of
the Father, the Word of God foretelling from the beginning that God should be seen by men, and
hold converse with them upon earth, should confer with them, and should be present with His own
creation, saving it, and becoming capable of being perceived by it, and freeing us from the hands
of all that hate us, that is, from every spirit of wickedness; and causing us to serve Him in holiness
and righteousness all our days, in order that man, having embraced the Spirit of God, might pass
into the glory of the Father.
5. These things did the prophets set forth in a prophetical manner; but they did not, as some
allege, [proclaim] that He who was seen by the prophets was a different [God], the Father of all
being invisible. Yet this is what those [heretics] declare, who are altogether ignorant of the nature
of prophecy. For prophecy is a prediction of things future, that is, a setting forth beforehand of
those things which shall be afterwards. The prophets, then, indicated beforehand that God should
be seen by men; as the Lord also says, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God."
But in respect to His greatness, and His wonderful glory, "no man shall see God and live," for
the Father is incomprehensible; but in regard to His love, and kindness, and as to His infinite power,
even this He grants to those who love Him, that is, to see God, which thing the prophets did also
predict. "For those things that are impossible with men, are possible with God." For man does
not see God by his own powers; but when He pleases He is seen by men, by whom He wills, and
when He wills, and as He wills. For God is powerful in all things, having been seen at that time
indeed, prophetically through the Spirit, and seen, too, adoptively through the Son; and He shall
also be seen paternally in the kingdom of heaven, the Spirit truly preparing man in the Son of
God, and the Son leading him to the Father, while the Father, too, confers [upon him] incorruption
for eternal life, which comes to every one from the fact of his seeing God. For as those who see
the light are within the light, and partake of its brilliancy; even so, those who see God are in God,
and receive of His splendour. But [His] splendour vivifies them; those, therefore, who see God, do
receive life. And for this reason, He, [although] beyond comprehension, and boundless and invisible,
rendered Himself visible, and comprehensible, and within the capacity of those who believe, that
He might vivify those who receive and behold Him through faith. For as His greatness is past
finding out, so also His goodness is beyond expression; by which having been seen, He bestows
life upon those who see Him. It is not possible to live apart from life, and the means of life is found
in fellowship with God; but fellowship with God is to know God, and to enjoy His goodness.