of those powers that are in him."

In a threefold manner, however, it is possible for man to err on this point:

First, by presumption, since one might enter upon such investigation as if he could attain a
perfect comprehension, and it is this kind of presumption that is denounced in Job 11:7: "Do you
think you can comprehend the steps of God, and find out the Almighty perfectly?" And Hilary
says: "Do not involve yourself in the hiddenness and mystery of this inconceivable nativity; do
not overwhelm yourself, presuming to comprehend the loftiest of intelligible things, but
understand that it is incomprehensible."

In the second place, error arises if, in matters of faith, reason has precedence of faith and not faith
of reason, to the point that one would be willing to believe only what he could know by reason,
when the converse ought to be the case: wherefore Hilary says: "While believing [in a spirit of
faith], inquire, discuss, carry through your speculation."

In a third way error results from undertaking an inquiry into divine things which are beyond
one's capacity. Wherefore it is said in Rom. 12:3, "Not to be more wise than it behoveth to be
wise, but to be wise unto sobriety and according as God hath divided to every one the measure
of faith." All men, indeed, have not been accorded the same measure; wherefore a thing is
beyond the capacity of one which is not beyond that of another.

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: Those things are said to be too high for man which exceed his capacity, no
those things which are of greater dignity according to nature: for the more man fixes his gaze
upon things loftier by na ture, in accordance with his capacity, the more it is to his advantage; but
in the consideration of things which in the least exceed his capacity, he easily falls into error.
Therefore the gloss on this same passage says: "Heretics are produced in two ways: namely,
when men, beyond their proper capacity entering upon inquiry concerning the Creator or
creatures fall into errors and depart from the truth."

2. Answer may be made: To search out is, as it were, to press one's investigation to the very end;
but this would be unlawful and presumptuous if one should so investigate divine truths as
though he could attain to complete comprehension as his goal.

3. It is answered: Where faith is sought for, those arguments which are in opposition to faith and
those which seek to have precedence over it are cast aside, but not those which in due manner
follow it.

4. It may be said: It is not lawful in this world to inquire into divine mysteries in such a way that
one would have the intention of comprehending them, as is evident from the words that follow:
"It is lawful to know that He was begotten," etc. For he undertakes an unlawful mode of inquiry
who seeks to know what the nature of this nativity is, since in regard to divine things we are able
to know what they are not, but not what they are.