despise them, but that in due time He will set them right. What is the force then
of "none of us lives to himself?" It means, We are not free, we have a Master
who also would have us live, and wills not that we die, and to whom both of
these are of more interest than to us. For by what is here said he shows that he
has a greater concern for us than we have ourselves, and considers more than we
do, as well our life to be wealth, as our death to be a loss. For we do not die to
ourselves alone, but to our Master also, if we do die. But by death here he means
that from the faith. However, this were enough to convince us that He takes care
for us, in that it is to Him we live, and to Him we die. Still he is not satisfied
with saying this, but proceeds further. For after saying, "Whether we live,
therefore, or die, we are the Lord's," and passing from that death to the physical
one, that he may not give an appearance of harshness to his language, he gives
another very great indication of His care for us. Now of what kind is this?
Ver. 9. "For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that He
might be Lord both of the dead and living."
And so let us at least convince you, that He is thoughtful for our salvation.
For had He not had this great care for us, where were the need of the
Dispensation (or Incarnation, [οἰκονομίας])? He then that has shown so much
anxiety about our becoming His, as to take the form of a servant, and to die, will
He despise us after we have become so? This cannot be so, assuredly it cannot!
Nor would He choose to waste so much pains. "For to this end (he says) he also
died," as if any one were to say, Such an one will not have the heart to despise
his servant. For he minded his own purse. [Cf. Exodus 21:21] For indeed we are
not so much in love with money, as is He with our salvation. Wherefore it was
not money, but His own Blood that He gave as bail for us. And for this cause He
would not have the heart to give them up, for whom He had laid down so great a
price. See too how he shows that His power also is unspeakable. For he says, "to
this end He both died and revived, that He might be Lord both of the dead and
the living." And above he said, "for whether we live or die, we are His." See
what a wide extended Mastery! see what unconquerable might! see what exact

providence over us! For tell me not, he means, of the living. Even for the
departed He takes care. But if He does of the departed, it is quite plain that He
does of the living also. For He has not omitted any point for this Mastery,
making out for Himself more claims than men do, and especially beside all other
things in order to take care of us. For a man puts down money, and for this clings
strongly to his own slave. But He Himself paid down His death; and the
salvation of one who was purchased at so great a price, and the Mastery over
whom He had gained with so much anxiety and trouble, He is not likely to count
of no value. But this he says to make the Judaizer abashed, and to persuade him
to call to mind the greatness of the benefit, and how that when dead he had come
to be alive, and that there was nothing that he gained from the Law, and how that
it would be the last degree of unfeelingness, to leave Him Who had shown so
much care toward him, and run away back to the Law. After attacking him then
sufficiently, he relaxes again, and says,
Ver. 10. "But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you set at nought
your brother?"
And so he seems to be setting them upon a level, but from that he has said,
he shows that the difference between them is great. First then by the appellation
of "brother" he does away with disputatiousness, and then also by calling that
awful day to their mind. For after saying, "Why do you set at nought your
brother?" he proceeds, "For we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of
Christ."
And he seems indeed to be again rebuking the more advanced in saying
this, but he is putting the mind of the Judaizer to confusion by not only calling
for his reverence to the benefit that had been done him, but also making him
afraid of the punishment to come. "For we shall all," he says, "stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ."
Ver. 11, 12. "For it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow
to Me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to God."