and as being possessed of the knowledge of all things, are found to be worse than the heathen, and
to entertain more blasphemous opinions even against their own Creator.

### Chapter X.—Perverse interpretations of Scripture by the heretics: God created all things out
of nothing, and not from pre-existent matter.

1. It is therefore in the highest degree irrational, that we should take no account of Him who is
truly God, and who receives testimony from all, while we inquire whether there is above Him that
[other being] who really has no existence, and has never been proclaimed by any one. For that
nothing has been clearly spoken regarding Him, they themselves furnish testimony; for since they,
with wretched success, transfer to that being who has been conceived of by them, those parables
[of Scripture] which, whatever the form in which they have been spoken, are sought after [for this
purpose], it is manifest that they now generate another [god], who was never previously sought
after. For by the fact that they thus endeavour to explain ambiguous passages of Scripture
(ambiguous, however, not as if referring to another god, but as regards the dispensations of [the
true] God), they have constructed another god, weaving, as I said before, ropes of sand, and affixing
a more important to a less important question. For no question can be solved by means of another
which itself awaits solution; nor, in the opinion of those possessed of sense, can an ambiguity be
explained by means of another ambiguity, or enigmas by means of another greater enigma, but
things of such character receive their solution from those which are manifest, and consistent and
clear.
2. But these [heretics], while striving to explain passages of Scripture and parables, bring forward
another more important, and indeed impious question, to this effect, "Whether there be really
another god above that God who was the Creator of the world?" They are not in the way of solving
the questions [which they propose]; for how could they find means of doing so? But they append
an important question to one of less consequence, and thus insert [in their speculations] a difficulty
incapable of solution. For in order that they may know "knowledge" itself (yet not learning this
fact, that the Lord, when thirty years old, came to the baptism of truth), they do impiously despise
that God who was the Creator, and who sent Him for the salvation of men. And that they may be
deemed capable of informing us whence is the substance of matter, while they believe not that God,
according to His pleasure, in the exercise of His own will and power, formed all things (so that
those things which now are should have an existence) out of what did not previously exist, they
have collected [a multitude of] vain discourses. They thus truly reveal their infidelity; they do not
believe in that which really exists, and they have fallen away into [the belief of] that which has, in
fact, no existence.