root of a tree, in furnishing sustenance to the whole tree. For we see
that by riches man acquires the means of committing any sin
whatever, and of sating his desire for any sin whatever, since money
helps man to obtain all manner of temporal goods, according to
Eccles. 10:19: "All things obey money": so that in this desire for
riches is the root of all sins.
Reply to Objection 1: Virtue and sin do not arise from the same
source. For sin arises from the desire of mutable good; and
consequently the desire of that good which helps one to obtain all
temporal goods, is called the root of all sins. But virtue arises from
the desire for the immutable God; and consequently charity, which is
the love of God, is called the root of the virtues, according to Eph.
3:17: "Rooted and founded in charity."
Reply to Objection 2: The desire of money is said to be the root of
sins, not as though riches were sought for their own sake, as being
the last end; but because they are much sought after as useful for
any temporal end. And since a universal good is more desirable than
a particular good, they move the appetite more than any individual
goods, which along with many others can be procured by means of
money.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as in natural things we do not ask what
always happens, but what happens most frequently, for the reason
that the nature of corruptible things can be hindered, so as not
always to act in the same way; so also in moral matters, we consider
what happens in the majority of cases, not what happens invariably,
for the reason that the will does not act of necessity. So when we say
that covetousness is the root of all evils, we do not assert that no
other evil can be its root, but that other evils more frequently arise
therefrom, for the reason given.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether pride is the beginning of every sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that pride is not the beginning of every
sin. For the root is a beginning of a tree, so that the beginning of a
sin seems to be the same as the root of sin. Now covetousness is
the root of every sin, as stated above (Article 1). Therefore it is also
the beginning of every sin, and not pride.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 10:14): "The beginning of
the pride of man is apostasy from God." But apostasy from God is a
sin. Therefore another sin is the beginning of pride, so that the latter
is not the beginning of every sin.
Objection 3: Further, the beginning of every sin would seem to be
that which causes all sins. Now this is inordinate self-love, which,
according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xiv), "builds up the city of
Babylon." Therefore self-love and not pride, is the beginning of every
sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 10:15): "Pride is the beginning
of all sin."
I answer that, Some say pride is to be taken in three ways. First, as
denoting inordinate desire to excel; and thus it is a special sin.
Secondly, as denoting actual contempt of God, to the effect of not
being subject to His commandment; and thus, they say, it is a
generic sin. Thirdly, as denoting an inclination to this contempt,
owing to the corruption of nature; and in this sense they say that it is
the beginning of every sin, and that it differs from covetousness,
because covetousness regards sin as turning towards the mutable
good by which sin is, as it were, nourished and fostered, for which
reason covetousness is called the "root"; whereas pride regards sin
as turning away from God, to Whose commandment man refuses to
be subject, for which reason it is called the "beginning," because the
beginning of evil consists in turning away from God.
Now though all this is true, nevertheless it does not explain the mind
of the wise man who said (Ecclus. 10:15): "Pride is the beginning of
all sin." For it is evident that he is speaking of pride as denoting
inordinate desire to excel, as is clear from what follows (verse 17):
"God hath overturned the thrones of proud princes"; indeed this is