great and populous?" Casting these and all such cares upon God, let us be
anxious only as to what He has commanded! Thus shall we rid ourselves of all
these sorrows; and although ten only among us should succeed, the ten would
quickly become twenty; the twenty fifty; the fifty a hundred; the hundred a
thousand; the thousand all the city. And just as when ten lamps are lighted, one
may easily fill the whole house with light, so also with respect to right actions;
should only ten act rightly, we shall light up a general flame throughout the city,
to shine forth, and to procure us safety. For not so naturally does the fire, when it
falls upon a forest, kindle the neighbouring trees successively, as will the
emulation for virtue, when it seizes upon a few minds, be mighty in its progress
to diffuse itself through the whole community.
19. Give me cause, then, to exult over you both in the present life, and at
that future Day, when those to whom talents have been entrusted, shall be
summoned! Your good reputation is a sufficient reward for my labours; and if I
see you living in piety, I have all I wish. Do, then, what yesterday I
recommended, and today will repeat, and will not cease to say it. Fix a penalty
for those who swear; a penalty which is a gain, and not a loss; and prepare
yourselves henceforth so as you may give us a proof of success. For I shall
endeavour to hold a long conversation with each of you, when this assembly is
dismissed; in order that in the continuance of discourse I may discover the
persons who have been acting rightly, and those who have not. And if I find any
one still swearing, I shall make him manifest to all who are amended, that by
reproving, rebuking, and correcting, we may quickly deliver him from this evil
habit. For better it is that he should amend through being reproached here, than
that he should be put to shame, and punished, in the presence of the whole
assembled universe, on that Day, when our sins shall be revealed to the eyes of
all men! But God forbid that any in this fair assembly should appear there
suffering such things! But by the prayers of the holy fathers, correcting all our
offenses, and having shown forth the abundant fruit of virtue, may we depart
hence with much confidence, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord

Jesus Christ, through whom, and with whom, be glory to the Father together
with the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 7 on the Statues
Recapitulation of former exhortations. Sin brought death and grief into
the world, and they tend to its cure. Grief serviceable only for the destruction
of sin. Remarks upon the passage, Genesis 1:1 . "In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth." It is argued that God's forethought for man
in the work of creation affords grounds of comfort; and that mercy is shown
even in chastisement, as in the saying, "Adam, where are you?" Concluding
admonition on the avoidance of oaths.
1. Yesterday, I discoursed unto your Charity in many words, and upon many
subjects; and if out of this variety, it be not possible for you to retain all, I wish
more particularly to recall to memory the observation, that God has implanted
the affection grief in our natures for no other reason but because of sin, and He
has made this evident from actual experience. For while we are grieved and
distressed through the loss of wealth; or by reason of sickness, and death, and the
other evils that befall us, we not only reap no consolation from our sorrow, but
we also increase the force of these calamities. But if we are in pain and sorrow
for our sins, we diminish the weight of sin; we make that little which is great;
and very often we blot it all out entirely. You should continually remember this, I
repeat, in order that you may mourn for sin only, and for nothing besides; and
the additional fact, that sin, though it brought death and sadness into our life, is
again destroyed by both these; which I have recently made evident. Therefore,
let us fear nothing so much as sin and transgression. Let us not fear punishment,
and then we shall escape punishment. Even as the Three Children were not
afraid of the furnace, and so escaped from the furnace. Such indeed it becomes
the servants of God to be. For if those who were brought up under the Old
dispensation, when death was not yet slain, nor his "brazen gates broken down,"
nor his "iron bars smitten in sunder;" so nobly encountered their end, how