greater things from God. But what is more worthy of ridicule, what more paltry,
than a soul which is always in anger, and wishing to take revenge? It is
womanly, this disposition, it is babyish. For as the babes are angry even with
lifeless things, and unless the mother beats the ground, they will not let go their
anger: so do these persons wish to revenge themselves on those who have
aggrieved them. Why then, it is they who are worthy of ridicule: for to be
overcome by passion, is the mark of a childish understanding, but to overcome
it, is a sign of manliness. Why then, not we are the objects of ridicule, when we
keep our temper, but they. It is not this that makes men contemptible— not to be
conquered by passion: what makes them contemptible is this— to be so afraid of
ridicule from without, as on this account to choose to subject one's self to one's
besetting passion, and to offend God, and take revenge upon one's self. These
things are indeed worthy of ridicule. Let us flee them. Let a man say, that having
done us numberless ills, he has suffered nothing in return: let him say that he
might again frantically assault us, and have nothing to fear. Why, in no other
(better) way could he have proclaimed our virtue; no other words would he have
sought, if he had wished to praise us, than those which he seems to say in abuse.
Would that all men said these things of me: "he is a poor tame creature; all men
heap insults on him, but he bears it: all men trample upon him, but he does not
avenge himself." Would that they added, "neither, if he should wish to do so, can
he:" that so I might have praise from God, and not from men. Let him say, that it
is for want of spirit that we do not avenge ourselves. This does us no hurt, when
God knows (all): it does but cause our treasure to be in greater safety. If we are
to have regard to them, we shall fall away from everything. Let us not look to
what they say, but to what becomes us. But, says he, "Let no man ridicule me,"
and some make a boast of this. O! What folly! "No man," says he, "having
injured me, has ridiculed me:" that is, "I had my revenge." And yet for this you
deserve to be ridiculed, that you took revenge. Whence came these words among
us— being, as they are, a disgrace to us and a pest, an overthrow of our own
proper life and of our discipline? It is in downright opposition to God that thou

(so) speakest. The very thing which makes you equal to God— the not avenging
yourself— this you think a subject for ridicule! Are not we for these things
worthy to be laughed at, both by ourselves, and by the heathen, when we thus
speak against God? I wish to tell you a story of a thing that happened in the old
times (which they tell) not on the subject of anger, but of money. A man had an
estate in which there was a hidden treasure, unknown to the owner: this piece of
ground he sold. The buyer, when digging it for the purpose of planting and
cultivation, found the treasure therein deposited, and came and wanted to oblige
the seller to receive the treasure, urging that he had bought a piece of ground, not
a treasure. The seller on his part repudiated the gift, saying, "The piece of ground
(is not mine), I have sold it, and I have no concern whatever with this
(treasure)." So they fell to altercation about it, the one wishing to give it, the
other standing out against receiving it. So chancing upon some third person, they
argued the matter before him, and said to him, "To whom ought the treasure to be
assigned?" The man could not settle that question; he said, however, that he
would put an end to their dispute— he would (if they pleased) be master of it
himself. So he received the treasure, which they willingly gave up to him; and in
the sequel got into troubles without end, and learned by actual experience that
they had done well to have nothing to do with it. So ought it be done likewise
with regard to anger; both ourselves ought to be emulous not to take revenge,
and those who have aggrieved us, emulous to give satisfaction. But perhaps
these things also seem to be matter of ridicule: for when that madness is widely
prevalent among men, those who keep their temper are laughed at, and among
many madmen he who is not a madman seems to be mad. Wherefore I beseech
you that we may recover (from this malady), and come to our senses, that
becoming pure from this pernicious passion, we may be enabled to attain unto
the kingdom of heaven, through the grace and mercy of His only-begotten Son,
with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor,
now and ever, world without end. Amen.