Homily on "Father, if it be possible..."
Against Marcionists and Manichæans
On the passage "Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me,
nevertheless not as I will but as you will:" and against Marcionists and
Manichæans: also, that we ought not to rush into danger, but to prefer the will of
God before every other will.
1. I lately inflicted a severe stroke upon those who are grasping and wish to
overreach others; I did this not in order to wound them but in order to correct
them; not because I hate the men, but because I detest their wickedness. For so
the physician also lances the abscess, not as making an attack upon the suffering
body, but as a means of contending with the disorder and the wound. Well today
let us grant them a little respite, that they may recover from their distress, and
not recoil from the remedy by being perpetually afflicted. Physicians also act
thus; after the use of the knife they apply plasters and drugs, and let a few days
pass while they devise things to allay the pain. Following their example let me
today, devising means for them to derive benefit from my discourse, start a
question concerning doctrine, directing my speech to the words which have been
read. For I imagine that many feel perplexed as to the reason why these words
were uttered by Christ: and it is probable also that any heretics who are present
may pounce upon the words, and thereby upset many of the more simple-minded
brethren.
In order then to build a wall against their attack and to relieve those who are
in perplexity from bewilderment and confusion, let us take in hand the words
which have been cited, and dwell upon the passage, and dive into the depths of
its meanings. For reading does not suffice unless knowledge also be added to it.
Even as the eunuch of Candace read, but until one came who instructed him in
the meaning of what he was reading he derived no great benefit from it. In order

therefore that you may not be in the same condition attend to what is said, exert
your understanding, let me have your mind disengaged from other thoughts, let
your eye be quick-sighted, your intention earnest: let your soul be set free from
worldly cares, that we may not sow our words upon the thorns, or upon the rock,
or by the way side, but that we may till a deep and rich field, and so reap an
abundant harvest. For if you thus attend to what is said you will render my
labour lighter and facilitate the discovery of that which you are seeking.
What then is the meaning of the passage which has been read "Father if it
be possible let this cup pass from me?" What does the saying mean? For we
ought to unlock the passage by first giving a clear interpretation of the words.
What then does the saying mean? "Father if it be possible take away the cross."
How do you say? Is he ignorant whether this be possible or impossible? Who
would venture to say this? Yet the words are those of one who is ignorant: for the
addition of the word "if," is indicative of doubt: but as I said we must not attend
to the words merely, but turn our attention to the sense, and learn the aim of the
speaker, and the cause and the occasion, and by putting all these things together
turn out the hidden meaning. The unspeakable Wisdom then, who knows the
Father even as the Father knows the Son, how should he have been ignorant of
this? For this knowledge concerning His passion was not greater than the
knowledge concerning His essential nature, which He alone accurately knew.
"For as the Father knows me" He says "even so know I the Father." [John 10:15]
And why do I speak of the only begotten Son of God? For even the prophets
appear not to have been ignorant of this fact, but to have known it clearly, and to
have declared beforehand with much assurance that so it must come to pass, and
would certainly be.
Hear at least how variously all announce the cross. First of all the patriarch
Jacob: for directing his discourse to Him he says "Out of a tender shoot did you
spring up:" by the word shoot signifying the Virgin and the undefiled nature of
Mary. Then indicating the cross he said "You lied down and slumber as a lion,
and as a lion's cub; who shall raise him up?" [ Ibid] Here he called death a