make all our labor vain? Not so, I beseech you. Let us call Him to applaud and
view our actions from whom we shall receive our rewards. Let us have nothing
to do with human eyes. For if we should even desire to attain this honor, we shall
then attain to it, when we seek that which comes from God alone. For, He says,
"Them that honor Me, I will honor." [1 Samuel 2:30] And even as we are best
supplied with riches when we despise them, and seek only the wealth which
comes from God ("Seek," he says, "the kingdom of God, and all these things
shall be added to you" [Matthew 6:33]); so it is in the case of honor. When the
granting either of riches or honor is no longer attended with danger to us, then
God gives them freely; and it is then unattended with danger, when they have not
the rule or power over us, do not command us as slaves, but belong to us as
masters and free men. For the reason that He wishes us not to love them is, that
we may not be ruled by them; and if we succeed in this respect, He gives us
them with great liberality. Tell me, what is brighter than Paul, when he says, "We
seek not honor of men, neither of you, nor yet of others." [1 Thessalonians 2:6]
What then is richer than him who has nothing, and yet possesses all things? For
as I said, when we are not mastered by them, then we shall master them, then we
shall receive them. If then we desire to obtain honor, let us shun honor, so shall
we be enabled after accomplishing the laws of God to obtain both the good
things which are here, and those which are promised, by the grace of Christ, with
whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 4 on the Gospel of John
John 1:1
"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God."
1. When children are just brought to their learning, their teachers do not
give them many tasks in succession, nor do they set them once for all, but they
often repeat to them the same short ones, so that what is said may be easily
implanted in their minds, and they may not be vexed at the first onset with the
quantity, and with finding it hard to remember, and become less active in picking
up what is given them, a kind of sluggishness arising from the difficulty. And I,
who wish to effect the same with you, and to render your labor easy, take little
by little the food which lies on this Divine table, and instill it into your souls. On
this account I shall handle again the same words, not so as to say again the same
things, but to set before you only what yet remains. Come, then, let us again
apply our discourse to the introduction.
"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God." Why, when
all the other Evangelists had begun with the Dispensation ; (for Matthew says,
"The Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David"; and Luke too
relates to us in the beginning of his Gospel the events relating to Mary; and in
like manner Mark dwells on the same narratives, from that point detailing to us
the history of the Baptist;) why, when they began with these matters, did John
briefly and in a later place hint at them, saying, "the Word was made flesh" [John
1:14]; and, passing by everything else, His conception, His birth, His bringing
up, His growth, at once discourse to us concerning His Eternal Generation?
I will now tell you what the reason of this is. Because the other Evangelists
had dwelt most on the accounts of His coming in the flesh, there was fear lest
some, being of grovelling minds, might for this reason rest in these doctrines