forethought for others, we may enjoy both here and in the life to come an
abundant recompense; through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by Whom, and with Whom, to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory,
honour, and adoration, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 19 on the Statues
On the Sunday called "Episozomenes," to those who had come to Antioch
from the country— also on the subject of avoiding oaths.
1. You have revelled during the last few days in the Holy Martyrs! You
have taken your fill of the spiritual feast! You have all exulted with honest
exultation! You have beheld their ribs laid bare, and their loins lacerated; the
blood flowing forth all around; ten thousand forms of torture! You have seen
human nature exhibiting that which is above nature, and crowns woven with
blood! You have danced a goodly dance throughout the whole city; this, your
noble captain leading you on; but sickness compelled me to remain at home,
although against my will. But if I did not take a part in the festival, I partook of
the pleasure of it. If I could not have the enjoyment of your public assembly, yet
did I share in your gladness. For such is the power of love, that it makes those
who are not actually in the enjoyment to rejoice equally with those who are;
persuading them to think the good things of their neighbour common to
themselves. Therefore even while I sat at home, I was rejoicing with you; and
now while I am not yet entirely freed from my sickness, I have risen up, and run
to meet you, that I may see your much desired faces, and take a part in the
present festival.
2. For I think the present day to be a very great festival indeed on account
of our brethren, who by their presence beautify our city, and adorn the Church; a
people foreign to us in language, but in harmony with us concerning the faith, a
people passing their time in tranquillity, and leading an honest and sober life. For
among these men there are no spectacles of iniquity— no horse racings, nor
harlots, nor any of that riot which pertains to a city, but every kind of
licentiousness is banished, and great sobriety flourishes every where. And the
reason is, that their life is a laborious one; and they have, in the culture of the

soil, a school of virtue and sobriety, and follow that art which God introduced
before all others into our life. For before the sin of Adam, when he enjoyed
much freedom, a certain tillage of the ground was enjoined upon him; not indeed
a laborious or a troublesome one, but one which afforded him much good
discipline, for he was appointed, it is said, "to till the garden, and to keep it."
Each of these men you may see at one time employed in yoking the labouring
oxen, and guiding the plough, and cutting the deep furrow; and at another
ascending the sacred pulpit, and cultivating the souls of those under their
authority; at one time cutting away the thorns from the soil with a bill-hook, at
another purging out the sins of the soul by the Word. For they are not ashamed of
work like the inhabitants of our city, but they are ashamed of idleness, knowing
that this has taught every kind of wickedness; and that to those who love it, it has
proved a teacher of iniquity from the beginning.
3. These are our philosophers, and theirs the best philosophy, exhibiting
their virtue not by their outward appearance, but by their mind. The pagan
philosophers are in character no wise better than those who are engaged on the
stage, and in the sports of actors; and they have nothing to show beyond the
threadbare cloak, the beard, and the long robe! But these, quite on the contrary,
bidding farewell to staff and beard, and the other accoutrements, have their souls
adorned with the doctrines of the true philosophy, and not only with the
doctrines, but also with the real practice. And were you to question any one of
these, who live a rustic life at the spade and plough, as to the dogmas respecting
which the pagan philosophers have discoursed an infinite deal, and have
expended a multitude of words, without being able to say any thing sound; one
of these would give you an accurate reply from his store of wisdom. And not
only is this to be wondered at, but that they confirm the credibility of these
doctrines by their actions. For of the fact that we have an immortal soul, and that
we shall hereafter render an account of what we have done here, and stand
before a fearful Tribunal, their minds are at once thoroughly persuaded, and they
have also regulated their whole course of life by such hopes as these; and have