THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.2.

Thirdly, that by his baptism he might accustom men to the baptism
of Christ; wherefore Gregory says in a homily (Hom. vii in Evang.)
that therefore did John baptize, "that, being consistent with his office
of precursor, as he had preceded our Lord in birth, so he might also
by baptizing precede Him who was about to baptize."
Fourthly, that by persuading men to do penance, he might prepare
men to receive worthily the baptism of Christ. Wherefore Bede [Scot.
Erig. in Joan. iii, 24] says that "the baptism of John was as profitable
before the baptism of Christ, as instruction in the faith profits the
catechumens not yet baptized. For just as he preached penance, and
foretold the baptism of Christ, and drew men to the knowledge of the
Truth that hath appeared to the world, so do the ministers of the
Church, after instructing men, chide them for their sins, and lastly
promise them forgiveness in the baptism of Christ."
Reply to Objection 1: The baptism of John was not a sacrament
properly so called [per se], but a kind of sacramental, preparatory to
the baptism of Christ. Consequently, in a way, it belonged to the law
of Christ, but not to the law of Moses.
Reply to Objection 2: John was not only a prophet, but "more than a
prophet," as stated Mt. 11:9: for he was the term of the Law and the
beginning of the Gospel. Therefore it was in his province to lead
men, both by word and deed, to the law of Christ rather than to the
observance of the Old Law.
Reply to Objection 3: Those baptisms of the Pharisees were vain,
being ordered merely unto carnal cleanliness. But the baptism of
John was ordered unto spiritual cleanliness, since it led men to do
penance, as stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the baptism of John was from God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the baptism of John was not from
God. For nothing sacramental that is from God is named after a mere
man: thus the baptism of the New Law is not named after Peter or
Paul, but after Christ. But that baptism is named after John,
according to Mt. 21:25: "The baptism of John . . . was it from heaven
or from men?" Therefore the baptism of John was not from God.
Objection 2: Further, every doctrine that proceeds from God anew is
confirmed by some signs: thus the Lord (Ex. 4) gave Moses the
power of working signs; and it is written (Heb. 2:3,4) that our faith
"having begun to be declared by the Lord, was confirmed unto us by
them that heard Him, God also bearing them witness by signs and
wonders." But it is written of John the Baptist (Jn. 10:41) that "John
did no sign." Therefore it seems that the baptism wherewith he
baptized was not from God.
Objection 3: Further, those sacraments which are instituted by God
are contained in certain precepts of Holy Scripture. But there is no
precept of Holy Writ commanding the baptism of John. Therefore it
seems that it was not from God.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 1:33): "He who sent me to baptize
with water said to me: 'He upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit,'" etc.
I answer that, Two things may be considered in the baptism of
John---namely, the rite of baptism and the effect of baptism. The rite
of baptism was not from men, but from God, who by an interior
revelation of the Holy Ghost sent John to baptize. But the effect of
that baptism was from man, because it effected nothing that man
could not accomplish. Wherefore it was not from God alone, except
in as far as God works in man.
Reply to Objection 1: By the baptism of the New Law men are
baptized inwardly by the Holy Ghost, and this is accomplished by
God alone. But by the baptism of John the body alone was cleansed
by the water. Wherefore it is written (Mt. 3:11): "I baptize you in
water; but . . . He shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost." For this
reason the baptism of John was named after him, because it effected
nothing that he did not accomplish. But the baptism of the New Law