FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.4.

place without a movement of the free-will; but He so infuses the gift
of justifying grace that at the same time He moves the free-will to
accept the gift of grace, in such as are capable of being moved thus.
Reply to Objection 1: Infants are not capable of the movement of
their free-will; hence it is by the mere infusion of their souls that God
moves them to justice. Now this cannot be brought about without a
sacrament; because as original sin, from which they are justified,
does not come to them from their own will, but by carnal generation,
so also is grace given them by Christ through spiritual regeneration.
And the same reason holds good with madmen and idiots that have
never had the use of their free-will. But in the case of one who has
had the use of his free-will and afterwards has lost it either through
sickness or sleep, he does not obtain justifying grace by the exterior
rite of Baptism, or of any other sacrament, unless he intended to
make use of this sacrament, and this can only be by the use of his
free-will. And it was in this way that he of whom Augustine speaks
was regenerated, because both previously and afterwards he
assented to the Baptism.
Reply to Objection 2: Solomon neither merited nor received wisdom
whilst asleep; but it was declared to him in his sleep that on account
of his previous desire wisdom would be infused into him by God.
Hence it is said in his person (Wis. 7:7): "I wished, and
understanding was given unto me."
Or it may be said that his sleep was not natural, but was the sleep of
prophecy, according to Num. 12:6: "If there be among you a prophet
of the Lord, I will appear to him in a vision, or I will speak to him in a
dream." In such cases the use of free-will remains.
And yet it must be observed that the comparison between the gift of
wisdom and the gift of justifying grace does not hold. For the gift of
justifying grace especially ordains a man to good, which is the
object of the will; and hence a man is moved to it by a movement of
the will which is a movement of free-will. But wisdom perfects the
intellect which precedes the will; hence without any complete
movement of the free-will, the intellect can be enlightened with the
gift of wisdom, even as we see that things are revealed to men in
sleep, according to Job 33:15,16: "When deep sleep falleth upon men
and they are sleeping in their beds, then He openeth the ears of men,
and teaching, instructeth them in what they are to learn."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: In the infusion of justifying grace there is a
certain transmutation of the human soul, and hence a proper
movement of the human soul is required in order that the soul may
be moved in its own manner. But the conservation of grace is
without transmutation: no movement on the part of the soul is
required but only a continuation of the Divine influx.