many blows were to keep quiet and bear the wounds meekly. Even as you ought
not to be surprised were a serpent, continually goaded, to grow fierce and spring
on the person that goaded it. Now no serpent steals on you so fierce as the devil,
leaping up against all; and, like a scorpion with its sting raised, he raises himself
upright. Let not this then disturb you: since of course he that returns from war
and victory and slaughter must needs be bloody, and oftentimes also have
received wounds. Do thou, then, for your part, when you see any one doing alms
and performing numberless other good works and so curtailing the power of the
devil, and then falling into temptations and perils; be not troubled thereupon.
This is the very reason why he fell into temptations, because he mightily smote
the devil.
"And how did God permit it?" you will say. That he might be crowned more
signally: that the other might receive a severer wound. For when after benefits
conferred a man suffers, and that grievously, and yet continually gives thanks, it
is a blow to the devil. For it is a great thing, even when our affairs are flowing on
prosperously, to show mercy and to adhere to virtue: but it is far greater in
grievous calamity not to desist from this noble occupation; this is he who may be
most truly said to do so for God's sake. So then, though we be in peril, beloved,
though we suffer ever so greatly, let us with the greater zeal apply ourselves to
our labors for virtue's sake. For this is not at all the season for retribution.
Here then let us not ask for our crowns, lest when the crowns come in their
season, we diminish our recompense. For as in the case of artificers, they who
support themselves and work receive higher pay; while those who have their
maintenance with their employers, are curtailed in no small part of the wages; so
also in regard to the saints: he that does immense good and suffers extreme evil
has his reward unimpaired and a far more abundant recompense, not only for the
good things which he has done, but also for the evil which he has suffered. But
he that enjoys rest and luxury here, has not such bright crowns there. Let us not
then seek for our recompense here. But "then" of all times let us rejoice, when
doing well we suffer ill. For God has in store for us in that world not only the

reward of our good deeds, but that of our temptations also.
But to explain myself more clearly: suppose two rich merciful men, and let
them give to the poor: then let one continue in his riches and enjoy all
prosperity: the other fall into poverty and diseases and calamities, and give God
thanks. Now when these are gone away into the other world, which will receive
the greater reward? Is it not quite plain that it will be he who is sick and in
adversity, seeing that though he did well and suffered ill, he felt not according to
human infirmity? I suppose this is plain to every one. And, in truth, this is the
adamantine statue, this is the considerate servant. [See Matthew 25:21] But if we
ought not to do any thing good for the hope of the kingdom, but because it so
pleases God, which is more than any kingdom; what does he deserve, who
because he does not receive his recompense here, has become more remiss
concerning virtue?
Let us then not be troubled when we see that such an one who invited
widows and made continual feasts lost his house by fire, or sustained some other
such like disaster. Yea, for this very thing he shall receive his reward. For even
Job was not so much admired for his almsdeeds as he was for his sufferings
afterwards. For this reason his friends also are little esteemed and deemed of no
account; because they sought for the recompenses of the present world, and with
a view to this gave sentence against the just man. Let us then not seek for our
return here; let us not become poor and needy; since surely it is of extreme
meanness, when heaven is proposed, and things which are above the heaven, to
be looking round on the things which are here. Let us not by any means do so;
but whichsoever of unexpected things come upon us, hold we fast the commands
of God continually, and obey the blessed Paul.
7. And let us make a little chest for the poor at home; and near the place at
which you stand praying, there let it be put: and as often as you enter in to pray,
first deposit your alms, and then send up your prayer; and as you would not wish
to pray with unwashen hands , so neither do so without alms: since not even the
Gospel hanging by our bed is more important than that alms should be laid up