was not entirely exempt from the laws of nature, so as not to receive
from exterior sources more or less advantage and help: since indeed
it was dependent on food wherewith to sustain life.
So we may say that, according to the climate, or the movement of the
stars, some would have been born more robust in body than others,
and also greater, and more beautiful, and all ways better disposed;
so that, however, in those who were thus surpassed, there would
have been no defect or fault either in soul or body.
Reply to Objection 1: By those words Gregory means to exclude
such inequality as exists between virtue and vice; the result of which
is that some are placed in subjection to others as a penalty.
Reply to Objection 2: Equality is the cause of equality in mutual love.
Yet between those who are unequal there can be a greater love than
between equals; although there be not an equal response: for a
father naturally loves his son more than a brother loves his brother;
although the son does not love his father as much as he is loved by
him.
Reply to Objection 3: The cause of inequality could be on the part of
God; not indeed that He would punish some and reward others, but
that He would exalt some above others; so that the beauty of order
would the more shine forth among men. Inequality might also arise
on the part of nature as above described, without any defect of
nature.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in the state of innocence man would

have been master over man?
Objection 1: It would seem that in the state of innocence man would
not have been master over man. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix,
15): "God willed that man, who was endowed with reason and made
to His image, should rule over none but irrational creatures; not over
men, but over cattle."
Objection 2: Further, what came into the world as a penalty for sin
would not have existed in the state of innocence. But man was made
subject to man as a penalty; for after sin it was said to the woman
(Gn. 3:16): "Thou shalt be under thy husband's power." Therefore in
the state of innocence man would not have been subject to man.
Objection 3: Further, subjection is opposed to liberty. But liberty is
one of the chief blessings, and would not have been lacking in the
state of innocence, "where nothing was wanting that man's good-will
could desire," as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 10). Therefore man
would not have been master over man in the state of innocence.
On the contrary, The condition of man in the state of innocence was
not more exalted than the condition of the angels. But among the
angels some rule over others; and so one order is called that of
"Dominations." Therefore it was not beneath the dignity of the state
of innocence that one man should be subject to another.
I answer that, Mastership has a twofold meaning. First, as opposed
to slavery, in which sense a master means one to whom another is
subject as a slave. In another sense mastership is referred in a
general sense to any kind of subject; and in this sense even he who
has the office of governing and directing free men, can be called a
master. In the state of innocence man could have been a master of
men, not in the former but in the latter sense. This distinction is
founded on the reason that a slave differs from a free man in that the
latter has the disposal of himself, as is stated in the beginning of the
Metaphysics, whereas a slave is ordered to another. So that one man
is master of another as his slave when he refers the one whose
master he is, to his own---namely the master's use. And since every
man's proper good is desirable to himself, and consequently it is a
grievous matter to anyone to yield to another what ought to be one's