things for our profit, though we know it not. And this is a proof that it greatly
profits, namely, that we know it not. "And the peace of God which passes all
understanding shall guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus." What
means this? "The peace of God" which He has wrought toward men, surpasses
all understanding. For who could have expected, who could have hoped, that
such good things would have come? They exceed all man's understanding, not
his speech alone. For His enemies, for those who hated Him, for those who
determined to turn themselves away, for these, he refused not to deliver up His
Only Begotten Son, that He might make peace with us. This peace then, i.e. the
reconciliation, the love of God, shall guard your hearts and your thoughts.
For this is the part of a teacher, not only to exhort, but also to pray, and to
assist by supplication, that they may neither be overwhelmed by temptations, nor
carried about by deceit. As if he had said, May He who has delivered you in such
sort as mind cannot comprehend, may He Himself guard you, and secure you, so
that you suffer no ill. Either he means this, or that that peace of which Christ
says, "Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you" [John 14:27]: this shall
guard you, for this peace exceeds all man's understanding. How? When he tells
us to be at peace with our enemies, with those who treat us unjustly, with those
who are at war and enmity toward us; is it not beyond man's understanding? But
rather let us look to the former. If the peace surpasses all understanding, much
more does God Himself, who gives peace, pass all understanding, not ours only,
but also that of Angels, and the Powers above. What means "in Christ Jesus"?
Shall guard us in Him, so that you may remain firm, and not fall from His faith.
Ver. 8. "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are just." What is "Finally"? It stands for, "I
have said all." It is the word of one that is in haste, and has nothing to do with
present things.
"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things
are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if

there be any praise, think on these things."
Ver. 9. "The things which you both learned and received, and heard and
saw in me."
What means, "whatsoever things are lovely"? Lovely to the faithful, lovely
to God. "Whatsoever things are true." Virtue is really true, vice is falsehood. For
the pleasure of it is a falsehood, and its glory is falsehood, and all things of the
world are falsehood. "Whatsoever things are pure." This is opposed to the words
"who mind earthly things." "Whatsoever things are honorable." This is opposed
to the words "whose god is their belly." "Whatsoever things are just," i.e. says
he, "whatsoever things are of good report." "If there be any virtue, if there be
any praise." Here he wills them to take thought of those things too which regard
men. "Think on these things," says he. Do you see, that he desires to banish
every evil thought from our souls; for evil actions spring from thoughts. "The
things which you both learned and received." This is teaching, in all his
exhortations to propose himself for a model: as he says in another place, "even
as you have us for an ensample." [Philippians 3:17] And again here, "What
things ye learned and received," i.e. have been taught by word of mouth, "and
heard and saw in me": both in respect of my words and actions and conduct. Do
you see, how about everything he lays these commands on us? For since it was
not possible to make an accurate enumeration of all things, of our coming in, and
going out, and speech, and carriage, and intercourse (for of all these things it is
needful that a Christian should have thought), he said shortly, and as it were in a
summary, "ye heard and saw in me." I have led you forward both by deeds and
by words. "These things do," not only in words, but do them also. "And the God
of peace shall be with you," i.e. you shall be in a calm, in great safety, you shall
suffer nothing painful, nor contrary to your will. For when we are at peace with
Him, and we are so through virtue, much more will He be at peace with us. For
He who so loved us, as to show favor to us even against our will, will He not, if
He sees us hastening toward Him, Himself yet much more exhibit His love
toward us?