SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.6.

altogether out of his body, or by withdrawing from his carnal senses,
he is not caught up into that vision." This has been carefully
discussed above (Question 175, Articles 4,5), where we spoke of
rapture, and in the FP, Question 12, Article 2, where we treated of the
vision of God.
Accordingly we must state that one may be in this life in two ways.
First, with regard to act, that is to say by actually making use of the
bodily senses, and thus contemplation in the present life can nowise
attain to the vision of God's essence. Secondly, one may be in this
life potentially and not with regard to act, that is to say, when the
soul is united to the mortal body as its form, yet so as to make use
neither of the bodily senses, nor even of the imagination, as happens
in rapture; and in this way the contemplation of the present life can
attain to the vision of the Divine essence. Consequently the highest
degree of contemplation in the present life is that which Paul had in
rapture, whereby he was in a middle state between the present life
and the life to come.
Reply to Objection 1: As Dionysius says (Ep. i ad Caium. Monach.),
"if anyone seeing God, understood what he saw, he saw not God
Himself, but something belonging to God." And Gregory says (Hom.
xiv in Ezech.): "By no means is God seen now in His glory; but the
soul sees something of lower degree, and is thereby refreshed so
that afterwards it may attain to the glory of vision." Accordingly the
words of Jacob, "I saw God face to face" do not imply that he saw
God's essence, but that he saw some shape [FP, Question 12, Article
11, ad 1], imaginary of course, wherein God spoke to him. Or, "since
we know a man by his face, by the face of God he signified his
knowledge of Him," according to a gloss of Gregory on the same
passage.
Reply to Objection 2: In the present state of life human
contemplation is impossible without phantasms, because it is
connatural to man to see the intelligible species in the phantasms,
as the Philosopher states (De Anima iii, 7). Yet intellectual
knowledge does not consist in the phantasms themselves, but in our
contemplating in them the purity of the intelligible truth: and this not
only in natural knowledge, but also in that which we obtain by
revelation. For Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. i) that "the Divine glory
shows us the angelic hierarchies under certain symbolic figures, and
by its power we are brought back to the single ray of light," i.e. to the
simple knowledge of the intelligible truth. It is in this sense that we

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.6.

must understand the statement of Gregory that "contemplatives do
not carry along with them the shadows of things corporeal," since
their contemplation is not fixed on them, but on the consideration of
the intelligible truth.
Reply to Objection 3: By these words Gregory does not imply that
the blessed Benedict, in that vision, saw God in His essence, but he
wishes to show that because "all creatures are small to him that sees
God," it follows that all things can easily be seen through the
enlightenment of the Divine light. Wherefore he adds: "For however
little he may see of the Creator's light, all created things become
petty to him."