John 9:8-9
"The neighbors therefore, and they which had seen him, that he was a beggar,
said, Is not this he that sat and begged? Some said, This is he."
The strangeness of what had been brought to pass led them even to
unbelief, though so much had been contrived that they might not disbelieve.
They said, "Is not this he that sat and begged?" O the lovingkindness of God!
Whither did He descend, when with great kindness He healed even beggars, and
so silenced the Jews, because He deemed not the illustrious, nor the
distinguished, nor the rulers, but men of no mark to be fit objects of the same
Providence. For He came for the salvation of all.
And what happened in the case of the paralytic, happened also with this
man, for neither did the one or the other know who it was that healed him. And
this was caused by the retirement of Christ, for Jesus when He healed always
retired, that all suspicion might be removed from the miracles. Since how could
they who knew not who He was flatter Him, or join in contriving what had been
done? Neither was this man one of those who went about, but of those who sat at
the doors of the Temple. Now when all were doubting concerning him, what says
he?
"I am he."
He was not ashamed of his former blindness, nor did he fear the wrath of
the people, nor did he decline showing himself that he might proclaim his
Benefactor.

John 9:10-11
"They said unto him, How were your eyes opened? He answered and said, A man
that is called Jesus."
What do you say? Does "a man" work such deeds? As yet he knew nothing
great concerning Him.
"A man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed my eyes."
2. Observe how truthful he is. He says not whence He made it, for he
speaks not of what he does not know; he saw not that He spat on the ground, but
that He spread it on he knew from sense and touch.
"And said unto me, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam."
This too his hearing witnessed to him. But how did he recognize His voice?
From His conversation with the disciples. And saying all this, and having
received the witness by the works, the manner (of the cure) he cannot tell. Now
if faith is needed in matters which are felt and handled, much more in the case of
things invisible.

John 9:12
"They said unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not."
They said, "Where is he?" having already murderous intentions against
Him. But observe the modesty of Christ, how He continued not with those who
were healed; because He neither desired to reap glory, nor to draw a multitude,
nor to make a show of Himself. Observe too how truthfully the blind man makes
all his answers. The Jews desired to find Christ to bring Him to the priests, but
when they did not find Him, they brought the blind man to the Pharisees, as to
those who would question him more severely. For which reason the Evangelist
remarks, that it was "the Sabbath" [John 9:14], in order to point out their wicked
thoughts, and the cause for which they sought Him, as though forsooth they had
found a handle, and could disparage the miracle by means of what appeared to
be a transgression of the Law. And this is clear from their saying immediately on
seeing him nothing but, "How opened he your eyes?" Observe also the manner
of their speech; they say not, "How did you receive your sight?" but, "How
opened he your eyes?" thus affording him an excuse for slandering Jesus,
because of His having worked. But he speaks to them shortly, as to men who had
already heard; for without mentioning His name, or that "He said unto me, Go,
wash," he at once says,