Hebrews 6:11-12
5. Why then did we say these things? "But we desire that everyone of you
do show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end; that you
be not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises."
"We desire," he says, and we do not therefore merely labor for, or even so
far as words go, wish this. But what? "We desire" that you should hold fast to
virtue, not as condemning your former conduct (he means), but fearing for the
future. And he did not say, 'not as condemning your former conduct, but your
present; for you have fainted, you have become too indolent'; but see how gently
he indicated it, and did not wound them.
For what does he say? "But we desire that every one of you do show the
same diligence unto the end." For this is the admirable part of Paul's wisdom,
that he does not expressly show that they "had" given in, that they "had" become
negligent. For when he says, "We desire that every one of you"— it is as if one
should say, I wish you to be always in earnest; and such as you were before, such
to be now also, and for the time to come. For this made his reproof more gentle
and easy to be received.
And he did not say, "I will," which would have been expressive of the
authority of a teacher, but what is expressive of the affection of a father, and
what is more than "willing," "we desire." All but saying, Pardon us, even if we
say what is distasteful.
"We desire that every one of you do show the same diligence to the full
assurance of your hope unto the end." Hope (he means) carries us through: it
recovers us again. Be not wearied out, do not despair, lest your hope be in vain.
For he that works good hopes also good, and never despairs of himself.
"That ye may not become dull." Still "become"; and yet he said above,

"seeing you have become dull of hearing." [Hebrews 5:11] Ob serve however
how he limited the dullness to the hearing. And here he hints the very same
thing; instead of 'that you may not continue in it,' he says [this]. But again he
leads on to that future time for which they were not yet responsible; saying in
effect "that you may not become too slothful": since for that which is not yet
come we could not be responsible. For he who in regard to the present time is
exhorted to be in earnest, as being remiss, will perhaps become even more
slothful, but he who is exhorted with reference to the future, not so.
"We desire" (he says) "that every one of you." Great is his affection for
them: he cares equally for great and small; moreover he knows all, and
overlooks no one, but shows the same tender care for each, and equal value for
all: from which cause also he the rather persuaded them to receive what was
distasteful in his words.
"That ye be not slothful," he says. For as inactivity hurts the body, so also
inactivity as to what is good renders the soul more supine and feeble.
6. "But followers" (he says) "of them, who through faith and patience
inherit the promises." And who they are, he tells afterwards. He said before,
"Imitate your own former well-doings." Then, lest they should say, What? He
leads them back to the Patriarch: bringing before them examples of well-doing
indeed from their own history, but of the thought of being forsaken, from the
Patriarch; that they might not suppose that they were disregarded and forsaken as
worthy of no account, but might know that it is [the portion] of the very noblest
men to make the journey of life through trials; and that God has thus dealt with
great and admirable men.
Now we ought (he says) to bear all things with patience: for this also is
believing: whereas if He say that He gives and thou immediately receive, how
have you also believed? Since in that case this is no longer of your faith, but of
Me, the Giver. But if I say that I give, and give after an hundred years, and you
have not despaired; then have you accounted Me worthy to be believed, then you
have the right opinion concerning Me. You see that oftentimes unbelief arises