which teaches that nothing but God has always existed, and that all else has had a
beginning of being except the one eternal God. Thus then it evidently appears that there
is nothing to traverse our assertion, that the world has not always existed. And this the
Catholic faith teaches: In the beginning God created heaven and earth (Gen. i, 1): and,
Before he made anything, from the beginning (Prov. viii, 22).

## CHAPTER XXXVIII--Arguments wherewith some try to show that the World is not
Eternal, and Solutions of the same
ARG. 1. God is the cause of all things (Chap.XV). But a cause must be prior in
duration to the effects of its action.
Reply. That is true of things that act by motion, for the effect is not till the termination of
the motion: but with causes that act instantaneously there is no such necessity.
Arg. 2. Since the whole of being is created by God, it cannot be said to be made out of
any being: whence the conclusion follows that it is made out of nothing, and
consequently that it has existence after not existing.
Reply. To the notion of being made out of something, if that is not admitted one must
supply the contradictory notion: which contradictory notion is not being made out of
anything. Observe, it is not being made out of nothing, except in the former sense of not
being made out of anything.
Arg. 3. It is not possible to pass through infinity. But if the world always had been,
infinity would have been passed through by this time, there being infinite days, or daily
rounds of the sun, if the world always has been.
Reply. An infinite quantity, though not existing in simultaneous actual realisation, may
nevertheless be in succession, because every infinite, so taken, is really finite. Any
given round of the sun could be passed, because so far the number of them was finite:
but when they are all viewed together, on the supposition that the world had always
existed, it would be impossible to fix upon any first day, and so to make any transition
from that to the present day, since transition always requires two extreme points.
Arg 4. It would follow that addition is made to the infinite, because to past days, or sunrounds, a new round is daily added.
Reply. There is nothing to hinder addition to the infinite on that side on which it is finite.
Supposing time eternal, it must be infinite as preceding, but finite as succeeding, for the
present is the limit of the past.
Arg. 5. It would follow in a world always existing that we should have an infinite series of
efficient causes, father being cause of child, and grandfather to father, and so to infinity.
Reply. The impossibility of an infinite series of efficient causes, according to
philosophers (Aristotle, Metaph. ii, 2), holds for causes acting together: because then
the effect has to depend on an infinity of co-existent actions; and the infinity of causes
there is essential, the whole infinite multitude of them being requisite for the production
of the effect. But in the case of causes not acting together no such impossibility holds, in
the opinion of those who suppose an endless series of generations. The infinity in this
case is accidental to the causes: for to Socrates's father, as such, it is quite an accident