SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.3.

justice properly speaking demands a distinction of supposits, and
consequently is only in one man towards another. Nevertheless in
one and the same man we may speak metaphorically of his various
principles of action such as the reason, the irascible, and the
concupiscible, as though they were so many agents: so that
metaphorically in one and the same man there is said to be justice in
so far as the reason commands the irascible and concupiscible, and
these obey reason; and in general in so far as to each part of man is
ascribed what is becoming to it. Hence the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 11)
calls this "metaphorical justice."
Reply to Objection 1: The justice which faith works in us, is that
whereby the ungodly is justified it consists in the due coordination
of the parts of the soul, as stated above (FS, Question 113, Article 1)
where we were treating of the justification of the ungodly. Now this
belongs to metaphorical justice, which may be found even in a man
who lives all by himself.
This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: God's justice is from eternity in respect of the
eternal will and purpose (and it is chiefly in this that justice
consists); although it is not eternal as regards its effect, since
nothing is co-eternal with God.
Reply to Objection 4: Man's dealings with himself are sufficiently
rectified by the rectification of the passions by the other moral
virtues. But his dealings with others need a special rectification, not
only in relation to the agent, but also in relation to the person to
whom they are directed. Hence about such dealings there is a
special virtue, and this is justice.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether justice is a virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not a virtue. For it is written
(Lk. 17:10): "When you shall have done all these things that are
commanded you, say: We are unprofitable servants; we have done
that which we ought to do." Now it is not unprofitable to do a
virtuous deed: for Ambrose says (De Officiis ii, 6): "We look to a
profit that is estimated not by pecuniary gain but by the acquisition
of godliness." Therefore to do what one ought to do, is not a virtuous
deed. And yet it is an act of justice. Therefore justice is not a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, that which is done of necessity, is not
meritorious. But to render to a man what belongs to him, as justice
requires, is of necessity. Therefore it is not meritorious. Yet it is by
virtuous actions that we gain merit. Therefore justice is not a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, every moral virtue is about matters of action.
Now those things which are wrought externally are not things
concerning behavior but concerning handicraft, according to the
Philosopher (Metaph. ix) [Didot ed., viii, 8]. Therefore since it belongs
to justice to produce externally a deed that is just in itself, it seems
that justice is not a moral virtue.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. ii, 49) that "the entire structure
of good works is built on four virtues," viz. temperance, prudence,
fortitude and justice
I answer that, A human virtue is one "which renders a human act and
man himself good" [Ethic. ii, 6], and this can be applied to justice.
For a man's act is made good through attaining the rule of reason,
which is the rule whereby human acts are regulated. Hence, since
justice regulates human operations, it is evident that it renders
man's operations good, and, as Tully declares (De Officiis i, 7), good
men are so called chiefly from their justice, wherefore, as he says
again (De Officiis i, 7) "the luster of virtue appears above all in
justice."
Reply to Objection 1: When a man does what he ought, he brings no
gain to the person to whom he does what he ought, but only abstains
from doing him a harm. He does however profit himself, in so far as
he does what he ought, spontaneously and readily, and this is to act