masters of them. But if you wish to make them greater and therefore keep them
shut up, even in this case the best plan of all is to scatter and distribute them in
all directions; because there can be no revenue without an outlay, no wealth
without expenditure. One may see that it is so even in worldly matters. So it is
with the merchant, so with the husbandman, who put forth the one his wealth,
the other his seed; the one sails the sea to disperse his wares, the other labors all
the year putting in and tending his seed. But here there is no need of any one of
these things, neither to equip a vessel, nor to yoke oxen, nor to plough land, nor
to be anxious about uncertain weather, nor to dread a fall of hail; here are neither
waves nor rocks; this voyage and this sowing needs one thing only, that we cast
forth our possessions; all the rest will that Husbandman do, of whom Christ says,
"My Father is the Husbandman." [John 15:1] Is it not then absurd to be sluggish
and slothful where we may gain all without labor, and where there are many toils
and many troubles and cares, and after all, an uncertain hope, there to display all
eagerness? Let us not, I beseech you, let us not be to such a degree senseless
about our own salvation, but let us leave the more troublesome task, and run to
that which is most easy and more profitable, that we may obtain also the good
things that are to come; through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy and quickening Spirit be glory,
now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 20 on the Gospel of John
John 1:43-44
"The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee and finds Philip, and says
unto him, Follow Me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and
Peter."
1. " To every careful thinker there is a gain" [Proverbs 14:23, Septuagint],
says the proverb; and Christ implied more than this, when He said, "He that
seeks finds." [Matthew 7:8] Wherefore it does not occur to me any more to
wonder how Philip followed Christ. Andrew was persuaded when he had heard
from John, and Peter the same from Andrew, but Philip not having learned
anything from any but Christ who said to him only this, "Follow Me,"
straightway obeyed, and went not back, but even became a preacher to others.
For he ran to Nathanael and said to him, "We have found Him of whom Moses in
the Law and the Prophets did write." Do you see what a thoughtful mind he had,
how assiduously he meditated on the writings of Moses, and expected the
Advent? For the expression, "we have found," belongs always to those who are
in some way seeking. "The day following Jesus went forth into Galilee." Before
any had joined Him, He called no one; and He acted thus not without cause, but
according to his own wisdom and intelligence. For if, when no one came to Him
spontaneously, He had Himself drawn them, they might perhaps have started
away; but now, having chosen this of themselves, they afterwards remained firm.
He calls Philip, one who was better acquainted with Him; for he, as having been
born and bred in Galilee, knew Him more than others. Having then taken the
disciples, He next goes to the capture of the others, and draws to Him Philip and
Nathanael. Now in the case of Nathanael this was not so wonderful, because the
fame of Jesus had gone forth into all Syria. [Matthew 4:24] But the wonderful
thing was respecting Peter and James and Philip, that they believed, not only