of accidents. Now subtlety does not deprive the glorified body of its
dimension; wherefore it nowise removes from it the aforesaid
necessity of occupying a distinct place from another body. Therefore
the subtlety of a glorified body will not enable it to be in the same
place together with another body, but it will be possible for it to be
together with another body by the operation of the Divine power:
even as the body of Peter had the power whereby the sick were
healed at the passing of Peter's shadow (Acts 5:15) not through any
inherent property, but by the power of God for the upbuilding of the
faith. Thus will the Divine power make it possible for a glorified body
to be in the same place together with another body for the perfection
of glory.
Reply to Objection 1: That Christ's body was able to be together with
another body in the same place was not due to its subtlety, but
resulted from the power of His Godhead after His resurrection, even
as in His birth [TP, Question 28, Article 2, ad 3]. Hence Gregory says
(Hom. xxvi in Evang.): "The same body went into His disciples the
doors being shut, which to human eyes came from the closed womb
of the Virgin at His birth." Therefore there is no reason why this
should be befitting to glorified bodies on account of their subtlety.
Reply to Objection 2: Light is not a body as we have said above
(Sent. ii, Question 13, Article 3; FP, Question 67, Article 2): hence the
objection proceeds on a false supposition.
Reply to Objection 3: The glorified body will pass through the
heavenly spheres without severing them, not by virtue of its subtlety,
but by the Divine power, which will assist them in all things at will.
Reply to Objection 4: From the fact that God will come to the aid of
the blessed at will in whatever they desire, it follows that they cannot
be surrounded or imprisoned.
Reply to Objection 5: As stated in Phys. iv, 5, "a point is not in a
place": hence if it be said to be in a place, this is only accidental,
because the body of which it is a term is in a place. And just as the
whole place corresponds to the whole body, so the term of the place
corresponds to the term of the body. But it happens that two places
have one term, even as two lines terminate in one point. And
consequently though two bodies must needs be in distinct places,
yet the same term of two places corresponds to the two terms of the

two bodies. It is in this sense that the bounds of contiguous bodies
are said to coincide.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is possible, by a miracle, for two

bodies to be in the same place?
Objection 1: It would seem that not even by a miracle is it possible
for two bodies to be in the same place. For it is not possible that, by
a miracle, two bodies be at once two and one, since this would imply
that contradictions are true at the same time. But if we suppose two
bodies to be in the same place, it would follow that those two bodies
are one. Therefore this cannot be done by a miracle. The minor is
proved thus. Suppose two bodies A and B to be in the same place.
The dimensions of A will either be the same as the dimensions of the
place, or they will differ from them. If they differ, then some of the
dimensions will be separate: which is impossible, since the
dimensions that are within the bounds of a place are not in a subject
unless they be in a placed body. If they be the same, then for the
same reason the dimensions of B will be the same as the dimensions
of the place. "Now things that are the same with one and the same
thing are the same with one another." Therefore the dimensions of A
and B are the same. But two bodies cannot have identical
dimensions just as they cannot have the same whiteness. Therefore
A and B are one body and yet they were two. Therefore they are at
the same time one and two.
Objection 2: Further, a thing cannot be done miraculously either
against the common principles---for instance that the part be not
less than the whole; since what is contrary to common principles
implies a direct contradiction---or contrary to the conclusions of
geometry which are infallible deductions from common principles--for instance that the three angles of a triangle should not be equal to
two right angles. In like manner nothing can be done to a line that is
contrary to the definition of a line, because to sever the definition
from the defined is to make two contradictories true at the same
time. Now it is contrary to common principles, both to the
conclusions of geometry and to the definition of a line, for two
bodies to be in the same place. Therefore this cannot be done by a
miracle. The minor is proved as follows: It is a conclusion of
geometry that two circles touch one another only at a point. Now if
two circular bodies were in the same place, the two circles described
in them would touch one another as a whole. Again it is contrary to
the definition of a line that there be more than one straight line
between two points: yet this would be the case were two bodies in