some art, and then he had continually stayed at home, or even passed his time
somewhere else, would not the teacher reject him? Would he not say to you,
"You have made an agreement with me, and appointed a time; if now your son
will not spend this time with me but in other places, how shall I produce him to
you as a scholar?" Thus also we must speak. For God will say also to us, "I gave
you time to learn this art of piety, wherefore have ye foolishly and uselessly
wasted that time? Why did ye neither go constantly to the teacher, nor give heed
to his words?" For to show that piety is an art, hear what the Prophet says,
"Come, you children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord."
[Psalm 34:11] And again, "Blessed is the man whom You instruct, Lord, and
teachest him out of Your Law." [Psalm 94:12] When therefore you have spent
this time in vain, what excuse will you have? "And why," says some one, "did He
deal out to us but little time?" O senselessness and ingratitude! That for which
thou were most bounden to give thanks to Him, for that He has cut short your
labors and abridged your toils, and made the rest long and everlasting, for this do
you find fault, and art discontented?
But I know not how we have brought our discourse to this point, and have
made it so long; we must therefore shorten it now. For this too is a part of our
wretchedness, that here if the discourse be long, we all become careless, while
there they begin at noon, and retire by torch and lamp light. However, that we be
not always chiding, we now entreat and beseech you, grant this favor to us and
to yourselves; and getting free from all other matters, to these let us rivet
ourselves. So shall we gain from you joy and gladness, and honor on your
account, and a recompense for these labors; while you will reap all the reward,
because having been aforetime so madly riveted to the stage, you tore yourselves
away, through fear of God, and by our exhortations, from that malady, and broke
your bonds, and hastened unto God. Nor is it "there" alone that you shall receive
your reward, but "here" also you shall enjoy pure pleasure. Such a thing is
virtue; besides giving us crowns in heaven, even here it makes life pleasant to us.
Let us then be persuaded by what has been said, that we may obtain the blessings

both here and hereafter, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now
and ever and world without end. Amen.

Homily 59 on the Gospel of John
John 9:34-36
"And they cast him out. And Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when
He had found him, He said unto him, Do you believe in the Son of God? He
answered and said, Who is He, Lord, that I might believe in Him?" And the rest.
1. They who for the sake of the truth and the confession of Christ suffer
anything terrible and are insulted, these are especially honored. For as he who
loses his possessions for His sake, the same it is who most finds them; as he who
hates his own life, the same it is who most loves it; so too he who is insulted, is
the same who is most honored. As fell out in the case of the blind man. The
Jews cast him out from the Temple, and the Lord of the Temple found him; he
was separated from that pestilent company, and met with the Fountain of
salvation; he was dishonored by those who dishonored Christ, and was honored
by the Lord of Angels. Such are the prizes of truth. And so we, if we leave our
possessions in this world, find confidence in the next; if here we give to the
afflicted, we shall have rest in heaven; if we be insulted for the sake of God, we
are honored both here and there.
When they had cast him out from the Temple, Jesus found him. The
Evangelist shows, that He came for the purpose of meeting him. And observe
how He recompenses him, by that which is the chiefest of blessings. For He
made Himself known to him who before knew Him not, and enrolled him into
the company of His own disciples. Observe also how the Evangelist describes
the exact circumstances; for when Christ had said, "Do you believe in the Son of
God?" the man replied, "Lord, who is He?" For as yet he knew Him not,
although he had been healed; because he was blind before he came to his
Benefactor, and after the cure, he was being worried by those dogs. Therefore,
like some judge at the games, He receives the champion who had toiled much