thousand things for covetousness' sake. So that it is the rich that are in need of
many [persons], yea oftentimes those who are unworthy of them. For instance,
they often stand in need of those who are in the rank of soldiers, or of slaves: but
the poor man has no need even of the Emperor himself, and if he should need
him, he is admired because he has brought himself down to this, when he might
have been rich.
Let no man then accuse poverty as being the cause of innumerable evils,
nor let him contradict Christ, who declared it to be the perfection of virtue,
saying, "If you will be perfect." [Matthew 19:21] For this He both uttered in His
words, and showed by His acts, and taught by His disciples. Let us therefore
follow after poverty, it is the greatest good to the sober-minded.
Perhaps some of those who hear me, avoid it as a thing of ill omen. I do not
doubt it. For this disease is great among most men, and such is the tyranny of
wealth, that they cannot even as far as words endure the renunciation of it, but
avoid it as of ill omen. Far be this from the Christian's soul: for nothing is richer
than he who chooses poverty of his own accord, and with a ready mind.
6. How? I will tell you, and if you please, I will prove that he who chooses
poverty of his own accord is richer even than the king himself. For he indeed
needs many [things], and is in anxiety, and fears lest the supplies for the army
should fail him; but the other has enough of everything, and fears about nothing,
and if he fears, it is not about so great matters. Who then, tell me, is the rich
man? He who is daily asking, and earnestly laboring to gather much together,
and fears lest at any time he should fall short, or he who gathers nothing
together, and is in great abundance and has need of no one? For it is virtue and
the fear of God, and not possessions which give confidence. For these even
enslave. For it is said, "Gifts and presents blind the eyes of the wise, and like a
muzzle on the mouth turn away reproofs." [Sirach 20:29]
Consider how the poor man Peter chastised the rich Ananias. Was not the
one rich and the other poor? But behold the one speaking with authority and
saying, "Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much" [Acts 5:8], and the other

saying with submission, "Yea, for so much." And who (you say) will grant to me
to be as Peter? It is open to you to be as Peter if you will; cast away what you
have. "Disperse, give to the poor" [Psalm 112:9], follow Christ, and you shall be
such as he. How? He (you say) wrought miracles. Is it this then, tell me, which
made Peter an object of admiration, or the boldness which arose from his manner
of life? Do you not hear Christ saying, "Rejoice not because the devils are
subject unto you; If you will be perfect [&c]." [Luke 10:20] Hear what Peter
says: "Silver and gold have I none, but what I have I give you." [Acts 3:6] If any
man have silver and gold, he has not those other gifts.
Why is it then, you say, that many have neither the one nor the other?
Because they are not voluntarily poor: since they who are voluntarily poor have
all good things. For although they do not raise up the dead nor the lame, yet,
what is greater than all; they have confidence towards God. They will hear in
that day that blessed voice, "Come, you blessed of My Father," (what can be
better than this?) "inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world: for I was an hungered and you gave Me meat: I was thirsty and you
gave Me drink: I was a stranger and you took Me in: I was naked and you
clothed Me: I was sick and in prison and you visited Me. Inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world." [Matthew 25:34-36] Let us
then flee from covetousness, that we may attain to the kingdom [of Heaven]. Let
us feed the poor, that we may feed Christ: that we may become fellow-heirs with
Him in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father together with the Holy
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever and world without end. Amen.