1 Bobadilla's true name was Nicolás Alonso y Pérez, but is known as Bobadilla because it was there that he was born about 1509. He studied at Alcalá de Henares, where he earned (1529) a bachelor's degree. He then taught logic at Valladolid and at the same time studied theology. He decided to go to Paris (1533) to study Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and there met Ignatius. As a Jesuit he proved to be a tireless worker: in Germany (1542-1548), in Italy (1548-1559), in Dalmatia (1559-1561), and again in Italy (1561-1590). He died in Loreto on September 23, 1590, the last Ignatius' Paris companions. 2 Bobadilla was at King Ferdinand's court in Vienna until sometime in January 1543, when he accompanied the king to the Diet of Nuremberg, arriving there on January 13. He may not have received the first letter (no. 4) until his

return to Vienna. By the time Bobadilla's response reached Rome, and with the delay mentioned in the present letter, it is very likely that Ignatius did not write his letter until mid 1543, or perhaps later. 3 Ignatius met Dr. Pedro Ortiz in Paris. In 1529 Ortiz went to Salamanca to teach Scripture and from the end of 1530 he represented Charles V's interest in Rome against Henry VIII's request for a divorce. Ortiz and Ignatius became close friends in Rome and Ignatius took him through the Exercises in 1538. 4 Francisco Ortiz was a Franciscan. 5 François Le Picart was a professor in Paris, an outspoken adversary against the Protestants, and a staunch friend of the Society. During the controversies at the Sorbonne, he defended the Society. 6 Marcello Cervini, the uncle of Roberto Bellarmino, was Cardinal of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme. He was later elected pope on April 9, 1555, retained his own name as Marcellus II, and died the following May 1. 7 Cardinal Giovanni Morone was Pope Paul III's nuncio in Germany, and when he was returning there in 1542, Bobadilla traveled with him. The cardinal later played a part in the founding of the Roman and German Colleges.

# 7. TO FATHER CLAUDE JAY

A Secret Mission of Charity

Rome, December 12 1545

In this letter to Claude Jay 1 Ignatius expresses the hope that the Society could act as an intermediary in bringing an errant brother back to the fold. A certain individual, who remains unidentified in the correspondence, 2 approached Ignatius to speak to him about Fra Bernardino Ochino 3 and to ask his help in bringing the Capuchin back to the Church. Ochino, one of the most celebrated preachers of that period, had come under the influence of Juan de Valdés, 4 while Ochino was in Naples, and soon afterwards began to manifest Protestant tendencies in his preaching. Rather than answer the summons to Rome to explain himself, Ochino left Italy in September 1542, went to Geneva and there followed the Reformation. Ignatius felt that he could not take the matter up with the pope until he had some letter indicating Fra Bernardino's desire for reconciliation. Not waiting for the unidentified individual to procure such a letter from Ochino, Ignatius, on his own initiative, wrote to Jay, who was then at Dillingen in Bavaria, and about to go to the Council of Trent to represent Cardinal Otto Truchsess of Augsburg. Since Ochino was then ministering to the Italian Protestant congregation in Augsburg, Ignatius thought that perhaps Jay could visit him, sound him out, and promise him the Society's help in doing all it can for him. If Ochino should express fear, Jay was to assure him that Ignatius would speak for him, as would Diego Laínez 5 and Alfonso Salmerón. The latter two were probably mentioned because they had been chosen by the pope to be his theologians at Trent (see letter #8). It is not known whether Jay visited Ochino, but we know that when Jay received Ignatius' letter, he was no longer in Bavaria but at Trent. Ignatius views this as a mission of charity of utmost importance and whose successful outcome would bring much glory to God. Ignatius' letter is in Spanish [ Ep . 1:343-344].