one, while the will is not determined to one; and this because the
effect is assimilated to the form of the agent, whereby the latter acts.
Now it is manifest that of one thing there is only one natural form
whereby it exists; and hence such as it is itself, such also is its work.
But the form whereby the will acts is not only one, but many,
according to the number of ideas understood. Hence the quality of
the will's action does not depend on the quality of the agent, but on
the agent's will and understanding. So the will is the principle of
those things which may be this way or that way; whereas of those
things which can be only in one way, the principle is nature. What,
however, can exist in different ways is far from the divine nature,
whereas it belongs to the nature of a created being; because God is
of Himself necessary being, whereas a creature is made from
nothing. Thus, the Arians, wishing to prove the Son to be a creature,
said that the Father begot the Son by will, taking will in the sense of
principle. But we, on the contrary, must assert that the Father begot
the Son, not by will, but by nature. Wherefore Hilary says (De
Synod.): "The will of God gave to all creatures their substance: but
perfect birth gave the Son a nature derived from a substance
impassible and unborn. All things created are such as God willed
them to be; but the Son, born of God, subsists in the perfect likeness
of God."
Reply to Objection 1: This saying is directed against those who did
not admit even the concomitance of the Father's will in the
generation of the Son, for they said that the Father begot the Son in
such a manner by nature that the will to beget was wanting; just as
we ourselves suffer many things against our will from natural
necessity---as, for instance, death, old age, and like ills. This appears
from what precedes and from what follows as regards the words
quoted, for thus we read: "Not against His will, nor as it were, forced,
nor as if He were led by natural necessity did the Father beget the
Son."
Reply to Objection 2: The Apostle calls Christ the Son of the love of
God, inasmuch as He is superabundantly loved by God; not,
however, as if love were the principle of the Son's generation.
Reply to Objection 3: The will, as a natural faculty, wills something
naturally, as man's will naturally tends to happiness; and likewise
God naturally wills and loves Himself; whereas in regard to things
other than Himself, the will of God is in a way, undetermined in itself,
as above explained (Question 19, Article 3). Now, the Holy Ghost

proceeds as Love, inasmuch as God loves Himself, and hence He
proceeds naturally, although He proceeds by mode of will.
Reply to Objection 4: Even as regards the intellectual conceptions of
the mind, a return is made to those first principles which are
naturally understood. But God naturally understands Himself, and
thus the conception of the divine Word is natural.
Reply to Objection 5: A thing is said to be necessary "of itself," and
"by reason of another." Taken in the latter sense, it has a twofold
meaning: firstly, as an efficient and compelling cause, and thus
necessary means what is violent; secondly, it means a final cause,
when a thing is said to be necessary as the means to an end, so far
as without it the end could not be attained, or, at least, so well
attained. In neither of these ways is the divine generation necessary;
because God is not the means to an end, nor is He subject to
compulsion. But a thing is said to be necessary "of itself" which
cannot but be: in this sense it is necessary for God to be; and in the
same sense it is necessary that the Father beget the Son.