Massuet here quotes Cicero and Ovid in proof of the sun being termed Titan. The Titans waged war against the gods, to
avenge themselves upon Saturn.

[names suggested], we infer, that perchance he who is to come shall be called "Titan." We will not,
however, incur the risk of pronouncing positively as to the name of Antichrist; for if it were necessary
that his name should be distinctly revealed in this present time, it would have been announced by
him who beheld the apocalyptic vision. For that was seen no very long time since, but almost in
our day, towards the end of Domitian's reign.
4. But he indicates the number of the name now, that when this man comes we may avoid him,
being aware who he is: the name, however, is suppressed, because it is not worthy of being
proclaimed by the Holy Spirit. For if it had been declared by Him, he (Antichrist) might perhaps
continue for a long period. But now as "he was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the abyss, and
goes into perdition," as one who has no existence; so neither has his name been declared, for
the name of that which does not exist is not proclaimed. But when this Antichrist shall have
devastated all things in this world, he will reign for three years and six months, and sit in the temple
at Jerusalem; and then the Lord will come from heaven in the clouds, in the glory of the Father,
sending this man and those who follow him into the lake of fire; but bringing in for the righteous
the times of the kingdom, that is, the rest, the hallowed seventh day; and restoring to Abraham the
promised inheritance, in which kingdom the Lord declared, that "many coming from the east and
from the west should sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob."

### Chapter XXXI.—The preservation of our bodies is confirmed by the resurrection and ascension
of Christ: the souls of the saints during the intermediate period are in a state of expectation
of that time when they shall receive their perfect and consummated glory.
1. Since, again, some who are reckoned among the orthodox go beyond the pre-arranged plan
for the exaltation of the just, and are ignorant of the methods by which they are disciplined
beforehand for incorruption, they thus entertain heretical opinions. For the heretics, despising the
handiwork of God, and not admitting the salvation of their flesh, while they also treat the promise
of God contemptuously, and pass beyond God altogether in the sentiments they form, affirm that
immediately upon their death they shall pass above the heavens and the Demiurge, and go to the
Mother (Achamoth) or to that Father whom they have feigned. Those persons, therefore, who
disallow a resurrection affecting the whole man (universam reprobant resurrectionem), and as far
as in them lies remove it from the midst [of the Christian scheme], how can they be wondered at,
if again they know nothing as to the plan of the resurrection? For they do not choose to understand,
that if these things are as they say, the Lord Himself, in whom they profess to believe, did not rise
again upon the third day; but immediately upon His expiring on the cross, undoubtedly departed
on high, leaving His body to the earth. But the case was, that for three days He dwelt in the place