bear all things with thankfulness." Consider therefore how great good will you
will enjoy, if you show forth those things by [your] works. For one thing only is
required from us, "in all things to give thanks" to God, and [then] we have all
things in abundance. I mean, for instance: have you lost ten thousand pounds of
gold? Forthwith give thanks unto God, and you have acquired ten times ten
thousand, by that word and thanksgiving.
8. For tell me when do you account Job blessed? When he had so many
camels, and flocks, and herds, or when he uttered that saying: "The Lord gave,
the Lord has taken away"? [Job 1:21] Therefore also the devil causes us losses,
not that he may take away our goods only, for he knows that is nothing, but that
through them he may compel us to utter some blasphemy. So in the case of the
blessed Job too, he did not strive after this only, to make him poor, but also to
make him a blasphemer. At any rate, when he had stripped him of every thing,
observe what he says to him through his wife, "Say some word against the Lord,
and die." [Job 2:9] And yet, O accursed one, you had stripped him of everything.
'But' (he says) 'this is not what I was striving for; for I have not yet accomplished
that for which I did all. I was striving to deprive him of God's help: for this cause
I deprived him of his goods too. This is what I wish, that other is nothing. If this
be not gained, he not only has not been injured at all, but has even been
benefited.' You see that even that wicked demon knows how great is the loss in
this matter?
And see him plotting the treachery through the wife. Hear this, you
husbands, as many as have wives that are fond of money, and compel you to
blaspheme God. Call Job to mind. But let us see, if it please you, his great
moderation, how he silenced her. "Wherefore" (he says) "have you spoken as one
of the foolish women [speaks]?" [Job 2:10] Of a truth "evil communications
corrupt good manners" [1 Corinthians 15:33], at all times indeed, but
particularly in calamities: then they who give evil advice have strength. For if
the soul is even of itself prone to impatience, how much more, when there is also
an adviser. Is it not thrust into a pit? A wife is a great good, as also a great evil.

For because a wife is a great [good], observe from what point he [Satan] wishes
to break through the strong wall. 'The depriving him of his property' (he says)
'did not take him; the loss has produced no great effect.' Therefore he says, 'If
indeed he will curse you to your face.' [Job 2:5] You see whither he was aspiring.
If then we bear [losses] thankfully, we shall recover even these things; and
if we should not recover them, our reward will be greater. For when he had
wrestled nobly, then God restored to him these things also. When He had shown
the devil, that it is not for these things that he serves Him, then He restored them
also to him.
9. For such is He. When God sees that we are not riveted to things of this
life, then He gives them to us. When He sees that we set a higher value on things
spiritual, then He also bestows on us things carnal. But not first, lest we should
break away from things spiritual: and to spare us He does not give carnal things,
to keep us away from them, even against our will.
Not so (you say) but if I receive [them], I am satisfied, and am the more
thankful. It is false, O man, for then especially will you be thoughtless.
Why then (you say) does He give [them] to many? Whence is it clear, that
He gives [them]? But who else, you say, gives? Their overreaching, their
plundering. How then does He allow these things? As He also [allows] murders,
thefts, and violence.
What then (you will say) as to those who receive by succession an
inheritance from their fathers, being themselves full of evils innumerable? And
what of this? How does God suffer them (you say) to enjoy these things? Surely
just as He allows thieves, and murderers, and other evil doers. For it is not now
the time of judgment, but of the best course of life.
And what I just now said, that I repeat, that they shall suffer greater
punishment, who, when they have enjoyed all good things, do not even so
become better. For all shall not be punished alike; but they who, even after His
benefits, have continued evil, shall suffer a greater punishment, while they who
after poverty [have done this] not so. And that this is true, hear what He says to