1 Tim. vi. 4.

they used to teach, and were persuaded of, that there is one God, the Maker of all things. And when
he shall have divested his mind of such error, and of that blasphemy against God which it implies,
he will of himself find reason to acknowledge that both the Mosaic law and the grace of the new
covenant, as both fitted for the times [at which they were given], were bestowed by one and the
same God for the benefit of the human race.
12. For all those who are of a perverse mind, having been set against the Mosaic legislation,
judging it to be dissimilar and contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, have not applied themselves
to investigate the causes of the difference of each covenant. Since, therefore, they have been deserted
by the paternal love, and puffed up by Satan, being brought over to the doctrine of Simon Magus,
they have apostatized in their opinions from Him who is God, and imagined that they have
themselves discovered more than the apostles, by finding out another god; and [maintained] that
the apostles preached the Gospel still somewhat under the influence of Jewish opinions, but that
they themselves are purer [in doctrine], and more intelligent, than the apostles. Wherefore also
Marcion and his followers have betaken themselves to mutilating the Scriptures, not acknowledging
some books at all; and, curtailing the Gospel according to Luke and the Epistles of Paul, they assert
that these are alone authentic, which they have themselves thus shortened. In another work,
however, I shall, God granting [me strength], refute them out of these which they still retain. But
all the rest, inflated with the false name of "knowledge," do certainly recognise the Scriptures; but
they pervert the interpretations, as I have shown in the first book. And, indeed, the followers of
Marcion do directly blaspheme the Creator, alleging him to be the creator of evils, [but] holding a
more tolerable theory as to his origin, [and] maintaining that there are two beings, gods by nature,
differing from each other,—the one being good, but the other evil. Those from Valentinus, however,
while they employ names of a more honourable kind, and set forth that He who is Creator is both
Father, and Lord, and God, do [nevertheless] render their theory or sect more blasphemous, by
maintaining that He was not produced from any one of those Æons within the Pleroma, but from
that defect which had been expelled beyond the Pleroma. Ignorance of the Scriptures and of the
dispensation of God has brought all these things upon them. And in the course of this work I shall
touch upon the cause of the difference of the covenants on the one hand, and, on the other hand,
of their unity and harmony.
13. But that both the apostles and their disciples thus taught as the Church preaches, and thus
teaching were perfected, wherefore also they were called away to that which is perfect— Stephen,
teaching these truths, when he was yet on earth, saw the glory of God, and Jesus on His right hand,
and exclaimed, "Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand
of God." These words he said, and was stoned; and thus did he fulfil the perfect doctrine, copying
in every respect the Leader of martyrdom, and praying for those who were slaying him, in these