their own may in turn be borne by others. As, in the building of a house, all the
stones hold not the same position, but one is fitted for a corner but not for the
foundations, another for the foundations, and not for the corner so too is it in the
body of the Church. The same thing holds in the frame of our own flesh;
notwithstanding which, the one member bears with the other, and we do not
require every thing from each, but what each contributes in common constitutes
both the body and the building.
Ver. 2. "And so fulfil the law of Christ."
He says not "fulfil," but, "complete ;" that is, make it up all of you in
common, by the things wherein you bear with one another. For example, this
man is irascible, you are dull-tempered; bear therefore with his vehemence that
he in turn may bear with your sluggishness; and thus neither will he transgress,
being supported by you, nor will you offend in the points where your defects lie,
because of your brother's forbearing with you. So do you by reaching forth a
hand one to another when about to fall, fulfil the Law in common, each
completing what is wanting in his neighbor by his own endurance. But if you do
not thus, but each of you will investigate the faults of his neighbor, nothing will
ever be performed by you as it ought. For as in the case of the body, if one were
to exact the same function from every member of it, the body could never
consist, so must there be great strife among brethren if we were to require all
things from all.
Ver. 3. "For if a man thinks himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself."
Here again he reflects on their arrogance. He that thinks himself to be
something is nothing, and exhibits at the outset a proof of his worthlessness by
such a disposition.
Ver. 4. "But let each man prove his own work."
Here he shows that we ought to be scrutinizers of our lives, and this not
lightly, but carefully to weigh our actions; as for example, if you have performed
a good deed, consider whether it was not from vain glory, or through necessity,

or malevolence, or with hypocrisy, or from some other human motive. For as
gold appears to be bright before it is placed in the furnace, but when committed
to the fire, is closely proved, and all that is spurious is separated from what is
genuine, so too our works, if closely examined, will be distinctly made manifest,
and we shall perceive that we have exposed ourselves to much censure.
Ver. 4. "And then shall he have his glorying in regard of himself alone and
not of his neighbor."
This he says, not as laying down a rule, but in the way of concession; and
his meaning is this, — Boasting is senseless, but if you will boast, boast not
against your neighbor, as the Pharisee did. For he that is so instructed will
speedily give up boasting altogether; and therefore he concedes a part that he
may gradually extirpate the whole. He that is wont to boast with reference to
himself only, and not against others, will soon reform this failing also. For he
that does not consider himself better than others, for this is the meaning of "not
in regard of his neighbor," but becomes elated by examining himself by himself,
will afterwards cease to be so. And that you may be sure this is what he desires
to establish, observe how he checks him by fear, saying above, "let every man
prove his own work," and adding here,
Ver. 5. "For each man shall bear his own burden."
He appears to state a reason prohibitory of boasting against another; but at
the same time he corrects the boaster, to that he may no more entertain high
thoughts of himself by bringing to his remembrance his own errors, and pressing
upon his conscience the idea of a burden, and of being heavily laden.
Ver. 6. "But let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that
teaches in all good things."
Here he proceeds to discourse concerning Teachers, to the effect that they
ought to be tended with great assiduity by their disciples. Now what is the reason
that Christ so commanded? For this law, "that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel," [1 Corinthians 9:14] is laid down in the New
Testament; and likewise in the Old, [Numbers 31:47; 35:1-8] many revenues