But since the mind at times uses the inferior powers as obedient instruments, and can
occupy itself with several objects, when they all bear upon one and all help to
apprehend that one, we must understand that the mind is then only hindered from its
flight to God by the lower powers, or by its own occupation with other objects, when
those powers or those objects bear not at all on the mind's movement to God:
otherwise, far from being hindrances, they may be positive helps to the free flight of
man's mind to his Creator.
Indeed man cannot altogether avoid occupying his mind about other things, by the fact
that he must be solicitous about the necessaries of his bodily life. There are however
among men various degrees of this solicitude. The first degree of solicitude extends just
so far as the common measure of human life requires. It involves the providing of
necessaries for self, wife, children, and other persons belonging to oneself according to
one's state. This degree of solicitude is lawful, and may be said to be connatural to man.

such perfection, there have not been given him commandments, but rather counsels to
draw him forth and incite him.

## CHAPTER CXXXI--Of the Counsels that are given in the Divine Law
BECAUSE the best part for man is to fix his mind on God and divine things, and it is
impossible for man to busy himself with intense ardour in a number of different
directions, there are given in the divine law counsels for enabling the human mind to
take a more free flight to God. These counsels withdraw men from the occupations of
the present life, so far as is possible for men still living on earth. Such withdrawal is not
so necessary to justice as that justice cannot be without it: for virtue and justice is not
done away with by man's making use of corporeal and earthly things according to the
order of reason: therefore these admonitions of the divine law are called counsels, and
not commandments, inasmuch as they advise a man to drop things less good for things
that are better.
Human solicitude busies itself about the common measure of human life in three chief
particulars. First, about one's own person, what one is to do or where to live; secondly,
about persons related to oneself, especially wife and children; thirdly, about the
procurement of exterior things, needful for the support of life. For cutting off solicitude
about exterior things there is given in the divine law the counsel of poverty, which
prompts to the casting away of the things of this world. Hence the Lord says: If thou wilt
be perfect, go, sell what thou hast and give to the poor, and come, follow me (Matt. xix,
21). For cutting off solicitude about wife and children there is given man the counsel of
virginity, or continence. Hence it is said: About virgins I have no commandment of the
Lord, but I give a counsel; and, adding the reason of this counsel, he continues: He that
is without a wife is solicitous for the things of the Lord, how he may please God; but he
that is with a wife is solicitous for the things of the world, how he may please his wife,
and is divided (1 Cor. vii, 25-33). For cutting off man's solicitude even about himself
there is given the counsel of obedience, whereby a man commits the disposal of his
acts to his superior. Therefore it is said: Obey your superiors and be subject to them, for
they watch as having to render an account of your souls (Heb. xiii, 17).
Because the highest perfection of human life consists in the mind of man being
detached from other things and fixed on God, and the three counsels aforesaid seem
singularly to dispose the mind to this detachment, we may see in them proper adjuncts
of a state of perfection, not that they themselves constitute perfection, but inasmuch as
they are dispositions to perfection, which consists in the union of the detached soul with
God. This is expressly shown in the words of our Lord counselling poverty: If thou wilt
be perfect, go, sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and follow me, -- where He
places the perfection of life in the following of Him.
They may also be called effects and signs of perfection. For when the mind is strongly
possessed with love and desire of anything, it thereupon counts other things as quite
secondary: so from man's mind being carried with fervent love and desire to divine
things, wherein its perfection consists, the consequence is a casting off of all that might
retard its movement to God, -- care of property, affection for wife and children, and even
love of one's own self. This is signified by the words of Scripture: If a man shall give the
whole substance of his house in exchange for love, he will account it nothing (Cant. viii,