Objection 5: Further, God alone is the searcher of hearts. Now prayer
is seated chiefly in the heart. Therefore it belongs to God alone to
know our prayers. Therefore our prayers are unknown to the saints.
On the contrary, Gregory, commenting on Job 14:21, "Whether his
children come to honor or dishonor, he shall not understand," says
(Moral. xii): "This does not apply to the souls of the saints, for since
they have an insight of Almighty God's glory we must nowise believe
that anything outside that glory is unknown to them." Therefore they
are cognizant of our prayers. Further, Gregory says (Dial. ii): "All
creatures are little to the soul that sees God: because however little
it sees of the Creator's light, every created thing appears
foreshortened to it." Now apparently the chief obstacle to the souls
of the saints being cognizant of our prayers and other happenings in
our regard is that they are far removed from us. Since then distance
does not prevent these things, as appears from the authority quoted,
it would seem that the souls of the saints are cognizant of our
prayers and of what happens here below.
Further, unless they were aware of what happens in our regard they
would not pray for us, since they would be ignorant of our needs.
But this is the error of Vigilantius, as Jerome asserts in his letter
against him. Therefore the saints are cognizant of what happens in
our regard.
I answer that, The Divine essence is a sufficient medium for knowing
all things, and this is evident from the fact that God, by seeing His
essence, sees all things. But it does not follow that whoever sees
God's essence knows all things, but only those who comprehend the
essence of God [FP, Question 12, Articles 7,8]: even as the
knowledge of a principle does not involve the knowledge of all that
follows from that principle unless the whole virtue of the principle be
comprehended. Wherefore, since the souls of the saints do not
comprehend the Divine essence, it does not follow that they know all
that can be known by the Divine essence---for which reason the
lower angels are taught concerning certain matters by the higher
angels, though they all see the essence of God; but each of the
blessed must needs see in the Divine essence as many other things
as the perfection of his happiness requires. For the perfection of a
man's happiness requires him to have whatever he will, and to will
nothing amiss: and each one wills with a right will, to know what
concerns himself. Hence since no rectitude is lacking to the saints,

they wish to know what concerns themselves, and consequently it
follows that they know it in the Word. Now it pertains to their glory
that they assist the needy for their salvation: for thus they become
God's co-operators, "than which nothing is more Godlike," as
Dionysius declares (Coel. Hier. iii). Wherefore it is evident that the
saints are cognizant of such things as are required for this purpose;
and so it is manifest that they know in the Word the vows, devotions,
and prayers of those who have recourse to their assistance.
Reply to Objection 1: The saying of Augustine is to be understood as
referring to the natural knowledge of separated souls, which
knowledge is devoid of obscurity in holy men. But he is not speaking
of their knowledge in the Word, for it is clear that when Isaias said
this, Abraham had no such knowledge, since no one had come to the
vision of God before Christ's passion.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the saints, after this life, know what
happens here below, we must not believe that they grieve through
knowing the woes of those whom they loved in this world: for they
are so filled with heavenly joy, that sorrow finds no place in them.
Wherefore if after death they know the woes of their friends, their
grief is forestalled by their removal from this world before their woes
occur. Perhaps, however, the non-glorified souls would grieve
somewhat, if they were aware of the distress of their dear ones: and
since the soul of Josias was not glorified as soon as it went out from
his body, it is in this respect that Augustine uses this argument to
show that the souls of the dead have no knowledge of the deeds of
the living.
Reply to Objection 3: The souls of the saints have their will fully
conformed to the Divine will even as regards the things willed. and
consequently, although they retain the love of charity towards their
neighbor, they do not succor him otherwise than they see to be in
conformity with the disposition of Divine justice. Nevertheless, it is
to be believed that they help their neighbor very much by interceding
for him to God.
Reply to Objection 4: Although it does not follow that those who see
the Word see all things in the Word, they see those things that
pertain to the perfection of their happiness, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 5: God alone of Himself knows the thoughts of