THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.5.

that it permeates into the very principles of life and searches the
inner-most recesses of the heart."
Reply to Objection 4: Just as the one same power of the principal
agent is instrumentally in all the instruments that are ordained unto
the production of an effect, forasmuch as they are one as being so
ordained: so also the one same sacramental power is in both words
and things, forasmuch as words and things combine to form one
sacrament.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the sacraments of the New Law derive

their power from Christ's Passion?
Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments of the New Law do not
derive their power from Christ's Passion. For the power of the
sacraments is in the causing of grace which is the principle of
spiritual life in the soul. But as Augustine says (Tract. xix in Joan.):
"The Word, as He was in the beginning with God, quickens souls; as
He was made flesh, quickens bodies." Since, therefore, Christ's
Passion pertains to the Word as made flesh, it seems that it cannot
cause the power of the sacraments.
Objection 2: Further, the power of the sacraments seems to depend
on faith. for as Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.), the Divine Word
perfects the sacrament "not because it is spoken, but because it is
believed." But our faith regards not only Christ's Passion, but also
the other mysteries of His humanity, and in a yet higher measure, His
Godhead. Therefore it seems that the power of the sacraments is not
due specially to Christ's Passion.
Objection 3: Further, the sacraments are ordained unto man's
justification, according to 1 Cor. 6:11: "You are washed . . . you are
justified." Now justification is ascribed to the Resurrection,
according to Rm. 4:25: "(Who) rose again for our justification."
Therefore it seems that the sacraments derive their power from
Christ's Resurrection rather than from His Passion.
On the contrary, on Rm. 5:14: "After the similitude of the
transgression of Adam," etc., the gloss says: "From the side of
Christ asleep on the Cross flowed the sacraments which brought
salvation to the Church." Consequently, it seems that the
sacraments derive their power from Christ's Passion.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1) a sacrament in causing
grace works after the manner of an instrument. Now an instrument is
twofold. the one, separate, as a stick, for instance; the other, united,
as a hand. Moreover, the separate instrument is moved by means of
the united instrument, as a stick by the hand. Now the principal
efficient cause of grace is God Himself, in comparison with Whom
Christ's humanity is as a united instrument, whereas the sacrament
is as a separate instrument. Consequently, the saving power must

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.6.