alone, as indeed was the case with Paul of Samosata. In order, therefore, to lead
away from this fondness for earth those who were like to fall into it, and to draw
them up towards heaven, with good reason he commences his narrative from
above, and from the eternal subsistence. For while Matthew enters upon his
relation from Herod the king, Luke from Tiberius Cæsar, Mark from the Baptism
of John, this Apostle, leaving alone all these things, ascends beyond all time or
age. Thither darting forward the imagination of his hearers to the " was in the
beginning," not allowing it to stay at any point, nor setting any limit, as they did
in Herod, and Tiberius, and John.
And what we may mention besides as especially deserving our admiration
is, that John, though he gave himself up to the higher doctrine, yet did not
neglect the Dispensation; nor were the others, though intent upon the relation of
this, silent as to the subsistence before the ages. With good cause; for One Spirit
It was that moved the souls of all; and therefore they have shown great
unanimity in their narrative. But you, beloved, when you have heard of "The
Word," do not endure those who say, that He is a work; nor those even who
think, that He is simply a word. For many are the words of God which angels
execute, but of those words none is God; they all are prophecies or commands,
(for in Scripture it is usual to call the laws of God His commands, and
prophecies, words; wherefore in speaking of the angels, he says, "Mighty in
strength, fulfilling His word") [Psalm 103:20], but this Word is a Being with
subsistence, proceeding without affection from the Father Himself. For this, as I
before said, he has shown by the term "Word." As therefore the expression, "In
the beginning was the Word," shows His Eternity, so "was in the beginning with
God," has declared to us His Co-eternity. For that you may not, when you hear
"In the beginning was the Word," suppose Him to be Eternal, and yet imagine the
life of the Father to differ from His by some interval and longer duration, and so
assign a beginning to the Only-Begotten, he adds, "was in the beginning with
God"; so eternally even as the Father Himself, for the Father was never without
the Word, but He was always God with God, yet Each in His proper Person.

How then, one says, does John assert, that He was in the world, if He was
with God? Because He was both with God and in the world also. For neither
Father nor Son are limited in any way. Since, if "there is no end of His
greatness" [Psalm 145:3], and if "of His wisdom there is no number" [Psalm
147:5], it is clear that there cannot be any beginning in time to His Essence. You
have heard, that "In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth" [Genesis
1:1]; what do you understand from this "beginning"? Clearly, that they were
created before all visible things. So, respecting the Only-Begotten, when you
hear that He was "in the beginning," conceive of him as before all intelligible
things, and before the ages.
But if any one say, "How can it be that He is a Son, and yet not younger
than the Father? Since that which proceeds from something else needs must be
later than that from which it proceeds"; we will say that, properly speaking,
these are human reasonings; that he who questions on this matter will question
on others yet more improper; and that to such we ought not even to give ear. For
our speech is now concerning God, not concerning the nature of men, which is
subject to the sequence and necessary conclusions of these reasonings. Still, for
the assurance of the weaker sort, we will speak even to these points.
2. Tell me, then, does the radiance of the sun proceed from the substance
itself of the sun, or from some other source? Any one not deprived of his very
senses needs must confess, that it proceeds from the substance itself. Yet,
although the radiance proceeds from the sun itself, we cannot say that it is later
in point of time than the substance of that body, since the sun has never appeared
without its rays. Now if in the case of these visible and sensible bodies there has
been shown to be something which proceeds from something else, and yet is not
after that from whence it proceeds; why are you incredulous in the case of the
invisible and ineffable Nature? This same thing there takes place, but in a
manner suitable to That Substance. For it is for this reason that Paul too calls
Him "Brightness" [Hebrews 1:3]; setting forth thereby His being from Him and
His Co-eternity. Again, tell me, were not all the ages, and every interval created