FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.4.

principles: and again those which the careful reflection of wise men
shows to be in accord with reason; since the people receive these
principles from God, through being taught by wise men.
Nevertheless both kinds of precepts are contained in the precepts of
the decalogue; yet in different ways. For the first general principles
are contained in them, as principles in their proximate conclusions;
while those which are known through wise men are contained,
conversely, as conclusions in their principles.
Reply to Objection 1: Those two principles are the first general
principles of the natural law, and are self-evident to human reason,
either through nature or through faith. Wherefore all the precepts of
the decalogue are referred to these, as conclusions to general
principles.
Reply to Objection 2: The precept of the Sabbath observance is
moral in one respect, in so far as it commands man to give some
time to the things of God, according to Ps. 45:11: "Be still and see
that I am God." In this respect it is placed among the precepts of the
decalogue: but not as to the fixing of the time, in which respect it is a
ceremonial precept.
Reply to Objection 3: The notion of duty is not so patent in the other
virtues as it is in justice. Hence the precepts about the acts of the
other virtues are not so well known to the people as are the precepts
about acts of justice. Wherefore the acts of justice especially come
under the precepts of the decalogue, which are the primary elements
of the Law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the precepts of the decalogue are

suitably distinguished from one another?
Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts of the decalogue are
unsuitably distinguished from one another. For worship is a virtue
distinct from faith. Now the precepts are about acts of virtue. But that
which is said at the beginning of the decalogue, "Thou shalt not have
strange gods before Me," belongs to faith: and that which is added,
"Thou shalt not make . . . any graven thing," etc. belongs to worship.
Therefore these are not one precept, as Augustine asserts (Qq. in
Exod. qu. lxxi), but two.
Objection 2: Further, the affirmative precepts in the Law are distinct
from the negative precepts; e.g. "Honor thy father and thy mother,"
and, "Thou shalt not kill." But this, "I am the Lord thy God," is
affirmative: and that which follows, "Thou shalt not have strange
gods before Me," is negative. Therefore these are two precepts, and
do not, as Augustine says (Qq. in Exod. qu. lxxi), make one.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (Rm. 7:7): "I had not known
concupiscence, if the Law did not say: 'Thou shalt not covet.'" Hence
it seems that this precept, "Thou shalt not covet," is one precept;
and, therefore, should not be divided into two.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Augustine who, in
commenting on Exodus (Qq. in Exod. qu. lxxi) distinguishes three
precepts as referring to God, and seven as referring to our neighbor.
I answer that, The precepts of the decalogue are differently divided
by different authorities. For Hesychius commenting on Lev. 26:26,
"Ten women shall bake your bread in one oven," says that the
precept of the Sabbath-day observance is not one of the ten
precepts, because its observance, in the letter, is not binding for all
time. But he distinguishes four precepts pertaining to God, the first
being, "I am the Lord thy God"; the second, "Thou shalt not have
strange gods before Me," (thus also Jerome distinguishes these two
precepts, in his commentary on Osee 10:10, "On thy" "two
iniquities"); the third precept according to him is, "Thou shalt not
make to thyself any graven thing"; and the fourth, "Thou shalt not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain." He states that there are
six precepts pertaining to our neighbor; the first, "Honor thy father