commanded the sea. [Daniel 4:27; Exodus 3:1] For his daughters too drew into
his net this honorable prey. [Numbers 10:29] Setting then your thoughts upon
these things, and reflecting upon the manly and heroic temper of those women,
trample upon the gorgeousness of this day, the adornments of dress, the costly
jewelry, the anointing with perfumes. And have done with those wanton and
delicate airs, and that mincing walk, and turn all this attentiveness unto the soul,
and kindle up in your mind a longing for the heavens. For should but his love
take hold of you, you will discern the mire and the clay, and ridicule the things
now so admired. For it is not even possible for a woman adorned with spiritual
attainments to be seeking after this ridiculousness. Having then cast this aside,
which wives of the lewder sort of men, and actresses, and singers, have so much
ambition in, clothe you with the love of wisdom, with hospitality, with the
succoring of the Saints, with compunction, with continual prayer. These be better
than cloth of gold, these more stately than jewels and than necklaces, these both
make you of good repute among men, and bring you great reward with God.
This is the dress of the Church, that of the playhouses. This is worthy of the
heaven, that, of horses and mules; that is put even round dead corpses, this
shines in a good soul alone wherein Christ dwells. Let this then be the dress for
us to acquire, that we also may have our praise sung everywhere, and be wellpleasing to Christ, by Whom and with Whom, etc. Amen.

## Homily 31 on Romans

Rom. XVI. 5
"Salute my well-beloved Epenetus, who is the first-fruits of Achaia unto
Christ."
I think that many even of those who have the appearance of being
extremely good men, hasten over this part of the Epistle as superfluous, and
having no great weight in it. And I think that the same befalls them in regard to
the genealogy that is in the Gospel. For because it is a catalogue of names, they
think they cannot get any great good from it. Yet the gold founders' people are
careful even about the little fragments; while these pass over even such great
cakes of gold. That this then may not befall them, what I have already said were
enough to lead them off from their listlessness. For that the gain even from this
is no contemptible one, we have shown even from what was said on a former
occasion, when we lifted up your soul by means of these addresses. We will
endeavor then today also to mine in this same place. For it is possible even from
bare names to find a great treasure. If, for instance, you were shown why
Abraham was so called, why Sarah, why Israel, why Samuel, you would find
even from this a great many real subjects of research. And from times too, and
from places, you may gather the same advantage. For the good man waxes rich
even from these; but he that is slothful, does not gain even from the most evident
things. Thus the very name of Adam teaches us no small wisdom, and that of his
son, and of his wife, and most of the others. For names serve to remind us of
several circumstances. They show at once God's benefits and women's
thankfulness. For when they conceived by the gift of God, it was they who gave
these names to the children. But why are we now philosophizing about names,
while meanings so important are neglected, and many do not so much as know
the very names of the sacred books? Still even then we ought not to recede from