SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.10.

outward practice, such as all external observances, to some of which
a religious is bound by the vow of his profession. Now the vow of
profession regards chiefly the three things aforesaid, namely
poverty, continence, and obedience, while all others are directed to
these. Consequently the transgression of these three involves a
mortal sin, while the transgression of the others does not involve a
mortal sin, except either by reason of contempt of the rule (since this
is directly contrary to the profession whereby a man vows to live
according to the rule), or by reason of a precept, whether given
orally by a superior, or expressed in the rule, since this would be to
act contrary to the vow of obedience.
Reply to Objection 1: He who professes a rule does not vow to
observe all the things contained in the rule, but he vows the regular
life which consists essentially in the three aforesaid things. Hence in
certain religious orders precaution is taken to profess, not the rule,
but to live according to the rule, i.e. to tend to form one's conduct in
accordance with the rule as a kind of model; and this is set aside by
contempt. Yet greater precaution is observed in some religious
orders by professing obedience according to the rule, so that only
that which is contrary to a precept of the rule is contrary to the
profession, while the transgression or omission of other things
binds only under pain of venial sin, because, as stated above (Article
7, ad 2), such things are dispositions to the chief vows. And venial
sin is a disposition to mortal, as stated above (FS, Question 88,
Article 3), inasmuch as it hinders those things whereby a man is
disposed to keep the chief precepts of Christ's law, namely the
precepts of charity.
There is also a religious order, that of the Friars Preachers, where
such like transgressions or omissions do not, by their very nature,
involve sin, either mortal or venial; but they bind one to suffer the
punishment affixed thereto, because it is in this way that they are
bound to observe such things. Nevertheless they may sin venially or
mortally through neglect, concupiscence, or contempt.
Reply to Objection 2: Not all the contents of the law are set forth by
way of precept; for some are expressed under the form of ordinance
or statute binding under pain of a fixed punishment. Accordingly,
just as in the civil law the transgression of a legal statute does not
always render a man deserving of bodily death, so neither in the law
of the Church does every ordinance or statute bind under mortal sin;
and the same applies to the statutes of the rule.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.10.

Reply to Objection 3: An action or transgression proceeds from
contempt when a man's will refuses to submit to the ordinance of the
law or rule, and from this he proceeds to act against the law or rule.
on the other hand, he does not sin from contempt, but from some
other cause, when he is led to do something against the ordinance of
the law or rule through some particular cause such as
concupiscence or anger, even though he often repeat the same kind
of sin through the same or some other cause. Thus Augustine says
(De Nat. et Grat. xxix) that "not all sins are committed through proud
contempt." Nevertheless the frequent repetition of a sin leads
dispositively to contempt, according to the words of Prov. 18:3, "The
wicked man, when he is come into the depth of sins, contemneth."