being baptized, to live aright. It is not right to give you the solution of these
questions. The preaching is not meant just for amusement. For even if I solve
this, on the back of this follows another question: of such questions there is a
bottomless deep. Therefore do not get into a habit of looking to have them
solved for you: else we shall never stop questioning. For look, if I solve this, I do
but lead the way to question upon question, numberless as the snowflakes. So
that this is what we learn, rather to raise questions, not to solve the questions that
are raised. For even if we do solve them, we have not solved them altogether, but
(only) as far as man's reasoning goes. The proper solution of such questions is
faith: the knowing that God does all things justly and mercifully and for the best:
that to comprehend the reason of them is impossible. This is the one solution,
and another better than this exists not. For say, what is the use of having a
question solved? This, that one needs no longer to make a question of the thing
which is solved. And if you get yourself to believe this, that all things are
ordered by the Providence of God, Who, for reasons known to Himself, permits
some things and actively works others, you are rid of the need of questioning,
and hast gotten the gain of the solution. But let us come back to our subject. Do
you not see such numbers of men suffering chastisements? God (say you)
permits these things to be. Make the right use of the health of the body, in order
to the health of the soul. But you will say, What is the use to me of labors and
toil, when it is in my power to get quit of all (my sins) without labor? In the first
place, this is not certain. It may happen, that a person not only does not get quit
of his sins without labor, but that he departs hence with all his sins upon him.
However, even if this were certain, still your argument is not to be tolerated. He
has drawn you to the contests: the golden arms lie there. When you ought to take
them, and to handle them, you wish to be ingloriously saved, and to do no good
work! Say, if war broke out, and the Emperor were here, and you saw some
charging into the midst of the phalanxes of the enemy, hewing them down,
dealing wounds by thousands, others thrusting (with the sword's point), others
hounding (now here, now there), others dashing on horseback, and these praised

by the Emperor, admired, applauded, crowned: others on the contrary thinking
themselves well off if they take no harm, and keeping in the hindmost ranks, and
sitting idly there; then after the close of the war, the former sort summoned,
honored with the greatest gifts, their names proclaimed by the heralds: while of
the latter, not even the name becomes known, and their reward of the good
obtained is only that they are safe: which sort would you wish to belong to?
Why, if you were made of stone, if you were more stupid even than senseless
and lifeless things, would you not ten thousand times rather belong to the
former? Yea, I beseech and implore you. For if need were to fall fighting, ought
you not eagerly to choose this? See you not how it is with them that have fallen
in the wars, how illustrious they are, how glorious? And yet they die a death,
after which there is no getting honor from the emperor. But in that other war,
there is nothing of the kind, but you shall in any wise be presented with your
scars. Which scars, even without persecutions, may it be granted all us to have to
exhibit, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.