Objection 1: It would seem that there are two filiations in Christ. For
nativity is the cause of filiation. But in Christ there are two nativities.
Therefore in Christ there are also two filiations.
Objection 2: Further, filiation, which is said of a man as being the
son of someone, his father or his mother, depends, in a way, on him:
because the very being of a relation consists "in being referred to
another"; wherefore if one of two relatives be destroyed, the other is
destroyed also. But the eternal filiation by which Christ is the Son of
God the Father depends not on His Mother, because nothing eternal
depends on what is temporal. Therefore Christ is not His Mother's
Son by temporal filiation. Either, therefore, He is not her Son at all,
which is in contradiction to what has been said above (Articles 3,4),
or He must needs be her Son by some other temporal filiation.
Therefore in Christ there are two filiations.
Objection 3: Further, one of two relatives enters the definition of the
other; hence it is clear that of two relatives, one is specified from the
other. But one and the same cannot be in diverse species. Therefore
it seems impossible that one and the same relation be referred to
extremes which are altogether diverse. But Christ is said to be the
Son of the Eternal Father and a temporal mother, who are terms
altogether diverse. Therefore it seems that Christ cannot, by the
same relation, be called the Son of the Father and of His Mother
Therefore in Christ there are two filiations.
On the contrary, As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii), things
pertaining to the nature are multiple in Christ; but not those things
that pertain to the Person. But filiation belongs especially to the
Person, since it is a personal property, as appears from what was
said in the FP, Question 32, Article 3; FP, Question 40, Article 2.
Therefore there is but one filiation in Christ.
I answer that, opinions differ on this question. For some, considering
only the cause of filiation, which is nativity, put two filiations in
Christ, just as there are two nativities. On the contrary, others,
considering only the subject of filiation, which is the person or
hypostasis, put only one filiation in Christ, just as there is but one
hypostasis or person. Because the unity or plurality of a relation is

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.6.

considered in respect, not of its terms, but of its cause or of its
subject. For if it were considered in respect of its terms, every man
would of necessity have in himself two filiations---one in reference to
his father, and another in reference to his mother. But if we consider
the question aright, we shall see that every man bears but one
relation to both his father and his mother, on account of the unity of
the cause thereof. For man is born by one birth of both father and
mother: whence he bears but one relation to both. The same is said
of one master who teaches many disciples the same doctrine, and of
one lord who governs many subjects by the same power. But if there
be various causes specifically diverse, it seems that in consequence
the relations differ in species: wherefore nothing hinders several
such relations being in the same subject. Thus if a man teach
grammar to some and logic to others, his teaching is of a different
kind in one case and in the other; and therefore one and the same
man may have different relations as the master of different disciples,
or of the same disciples in regard to diverse doctrines. Sometimes,
however, it happens that a man bears a relation to several in respect
of various causes, but of the same species: thus a father may have
several sons by several acts of generation. Wherefore the
paternity cannot differ specifically, since the acts of generation are
specifically the same. And because several forms of the same
species cannot at the same time be in the same subject, it is
impossible for several paternities to be in a man who is the father of
several sons by natural generation. But it would not be so were he
the father of one son by natural generation and of another by
adoption.
Now, it is manifest that Christ was not born by one and the same
nativity, of the Father from eternity, and of His Mother in time:
indeed, these two nativities differ specifically. Wherefore, as to this,
we must say that there are various filiations, one temporal and the
other eternal. Since, however, the subject of filiation is neither the
nature nor part of the nature, but the person or hypostasis alone;
and since in Christ there is no other hypostasis or person than the
eternal, there can be no other filiation in Christ but that which is in
the eternal hypostasis. Now, every relation which is predicated of
God from time does not put something real in the eternal God, but
only something according to our way of thinking, as we have said in
the FP, Question 13, Article 7. Therefore the filiation by which Christ
is referred to His Mother cannot be a real relation, but only a relation
of reason.