Elucidation
The editor of this American Series confines himself in general to such occasional and very brief
annotations as may suggest to students and others the practical views which are requisite to a clear
comprehension of authors who wrote for past ages; for a sort and condition of men no longer
existing, whose extinction as a class is, indeed, largely due to these writings. But he reserved to
himself the privilege of correcting palpable mistakes, especially in points which bear upon questions
of our own times.
That our learned translators have unaccountably admitted a very inaccurate translation of the
crucial paragraph in book iii. cap. iii. sect. 2, I have shown in the footnote at that place. It is evident,
(1) because they themselves are not satisfied with it, and (2) because I have set it side by side with
the more literal rendering of a writer who would have preferred their reading if it could have borne
the test of criticism.
Now, the authors of the Latin translation may have designed the ambiguity which gives the
Ultramontane party an apparent advantage; but it is an advantage which disappears as soon as it is
examined, and hence I am content to take it as it stands. Various conjectures have been made as to

the original Greek of Irenæus; but the Latin answers every purpose of the author's argument, and
is fatal to the claims of the Papacy. Let me recur to the translation given, in loco, from a Roman
Catholic, and this will be seen at once.
For he thus renders it:—
1. In this Church, "ever, by those who are on every side, has been preserved that tradition which
is from apostles." How would such a proposition have sounded to Pius IX. in the Vatican Council?
The faith is preserved by those who come to Rome, not by the Bishop who presides there.
2. "For to this Church, on account of more potent principality, it is necessary that every
Church (that is, those who are, on every side, faithful) resort." The greatness of Rome, that is, as
the capital of the Empire, imparts to the local Church a superior dignity, even as compared with
Lyons, or any other metropolitical Church. Everybody visits Rome: hence you find there faithful
witnesses from every side (from all the Churches); and their united testimony it is which preserves
in Rome the pure apostolic traditions.
The Latin, thus translated by a candid Roman Catholic, reverses the whole system of the Papacy.
Pius IX. informed his Bishops, at the late Council, that they were not called to bear their testimony,
but to hear his infallible decree; "reducing us," said the Archbishop of Paris, "to a council of
sacristans."
Sustaining these views by a few footnotes, I add (1) a literal rendering of my own, and then (2)
a metaphrase of the same, bringing out the argument from the crabbed obstructions of the Latin
text. This, then, is what Irenæus says: (a) "For it is necessary for every Church (that is to say, the
faithful from all parts) to meet in this Church, on account of the superior magistracy; in which
Church, by those who are from all places, the tradition of the apostles has been preserved." Or,
more freely rendered: (b) "On account of the chief magistracy [of the empire], the faithful from
all parts, representing every Church, are obliged to resort to Rome, and there to come together; so
that [it is the distinction of this Church that], in it, the tradition of the apostles has been preserved
by Christians gathered together out of all the Churches." Taking the entire argument of our author
with the context, then, it amounts to this: "We must ask, not for local, but universal, testimony.
Now, in every Church founded by the apostles has been handed down their traditions; but, as it
would be a tedious thing to collect them all, let this suffice. Take that Church (nearest at hand, and
which is the only Apostolic Church of the West), the great and glorious Church at Rome, which
was there founded by the two apostles Peter and Paul. In her have been preserved the traditions of
all the Churches, because everybody is forced to go to the seat of empire: and therefore, by these
the Church.
was speaking of the greater antiquity of Rome as compared with other (Western) Churches. Even so, he shows that the argument
of Irenæus is fatal to Roman pretensions, which admit of no such ideas as he advances, and no such freedom as that of his dealings
with Rome.