unto them. Yea, for it is unworthy of you to approach your Lord for such things.
And thou, who ought to spend all your zeal and your care for those unspeakable
blessings, dost greatly disgrace yourself by consuming it on the desire of
transitory things.
"How then?" says one, "did He not bid us ask for bread?" Nay, He added,
"daily," and to this again, "this day," which same thing in fact He does here also.
For He said not, "Take no thought," but, "Take no thought for the morrow," at the
same time both affording us liberty, and fastening our soul on those things that
are more necessary to us.
For to this end also He bade us ask even those, not as though God needed
reminding by us, but that we might learn that by His help we accomplish
whatever we do accomplish, and that we might be made more His own by our
continual prayer for these things.
Do you see how by this again He would persuade them, that they shall
surely receive the things present? For He that bestows the greater, much more
will He give the less. "For not for this end," says He, "did I tell you not to take
thought nor to ask, that you should suffer distress, and go about naked, but in
order that you might be in abundance of these things also:" and this, you see,
was suited above all things to attract them to Him. So that like as in almsgiving,
when deterring them from making a display to men, He won upon them chiefly
by promising to furnish them with it more liberally;— "for your Father," says
He, "who sees in secret, shall reward you openly;" [Matthew 6:4] — even so
here also, in drawing them off from seeking these things, this is His persuasive
topic, that He promises to bestow it on them, not seeking it, in greater
abundance. Thus, to this end, says He, do I bid you not seek, not that you may
not receive, but that you may receive plentifully; that you may receive in the
fashion that becomes you, with the profit which you ought to have; that you may
not, by taking thought, and distracting yourself in anxiety about these, render
yourself unworthy both of these, and of the things spiritual; that you may not
undergo unnecessary distress, and again fall away from that which is set before

you.
5. "Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for sufficient unto the day is
the evil thereof:" that is to say, the affliction, and the bruising thereof.
[Matthew 5:34] Is it not enough for you, to eat your bread in the sweat of your
face? Why add the further affliction that comes of anxiety, when you are on the
point to be delivered henceforth even from the former toils?
By "evil" here He means, not wickedness, far from it, but affliction, and
trouble, and calamities; much as in another place also He says, "Is there evil in a
city, which the Lord has not done?" nor any thing like these, but the scourges
which are borne from above. And again, "I," says He, "make peace, and create
evils:" [Isaiah 45:7] For neither in this place does He speak of wickedness, but of
famines, and pestilences, things accounted evil by most men: the generality
being wont to call these things evil. Thus, for example, the priests and prophets
of those five lordships, when having yoked the cattle to the ark, they let them go
without their calves, [1 Samuel 6:9] gave the name of "evil" to those heaven-sent
plagues, and the dismay and anguish which thereby sprang up within them.
This then is His meaning here also, when He says, "sufficient unto the day
is the evil thereof." For nothing so pains the soul, as carefulness and anxiety.
Thus did Paul also, when urging to celibacy, give counsel, saying, "I would have
you without carefulness."
But when He says, "the morrow shall take thought for itself," He says it not,
as though the day took thought for these things, but forasmuch as He had to
speak to a people somewhat imperfect, willing to make what He says more
expressive, He personifies the time, speaking unto them according to the custom
of the generality.
And here indeed He advises, but as He proceeds, He even makes it a law,
saying, "provide neither gold nor silver, nor scrip for your journey."
[Matthew 10:9-10] Thus, having shown it all forth in His actions, then after that
He introduces the verbal enactment of it more determinately, the precept too
having then become more easy of acceptance, confirmed as it had been