SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.7, C.8.

and this cleanness is the result of the gift of understanding.
Again, the sight of God is twofold. One is perfect, whereby God's
Essence is seen: the other is imperfect, whereby, though we see not
what God is, yet we see what He is not; and whereby, the more
perfectly do we know God in this life, the more we understand that
He surpasses all that the mind comprehends. Each of these visions
of God belongs to the gift of understanding; the first, to the gift of
understanding in its state of perfection, as possessed in heaven; the
second, to the gift of understanding in its state of inchoation, as
possessed by wayfarers.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections: for the first two
arguments refer to the first kind of cleanness; while the third refers
to the perfect vision of God. Moreover the gifts both perfect us in this
life by way of inchoation, and will be fulfilled, as stated above (FS,
Question 69, Article 2).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.7, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether faith, among the fruits, responds to the

gift of understanding?
Objection 1: It would seem that, among the fruits, faith does not
respond to the gift of understanding. For understanding is the fruit of
faith, since it is written (Is. 7:9) according to another reading [The
Septuagint]: "If you will not believe you shall not understand," where
our version has: "If you will not believe, you shall not continue."
Therefore fruit is not the fruit of understanding.
Objection 2: Further, that which precedes is not the fruit of what
follows. But faith seems to precede understanding, since it is the
foundation of the entire spiritual edifice, as stated above (Question 4,
Articles 1,7). Therefore faith is not the fruit of understanding.
Objection 3: Further, more gifts pertain to the intellect than to the
appetite. Now, among the fruits, only one pertains to the intellect;
namely, faith, while all the others pertain to the appetite. Therefore
faith, seemingly, does not pertain to understanding more than to
wisdom, knowledge or counsel.
On the contrary, The end of a thing is its fruit. Now the gift of
understanding seems to be ordained chiefly to the certitude of faith,
which certitude is reckoned a fruit. For a gloss on Gal. 5:22 says that
the "faith which is a fruit, is certitude about the unseen." Therefore
faith, among the fruits, responds to the gift of understanding.
I answer that, The fruits of the Spirit, as stated above (FS, Question
70, Article 1), when we were discussing them, are so called because
they are something ultimate and delightful, produced in us by the
power of the Holy Ghost. Now the ultimate and delightful has the
nature of an end, which is the proper object of the will: and
consequently that which is ultimate and delightful with regard to the
will, must be, after a fashion, the fruit of all the other things that
pertain to the other powers.
Accordingly, therefore, to this kind of gift of virtue that perfects a
power, we may distinguish a double fruit: one, belonging to the same
power; the other, the last of all as it were, belonging to the will. In
this way we must conclude that the fruit which properly responds to
the gift of understanding is faith, i.e. the certitude of faith; while the