But if to the mouth the disgrace be such, think what must it be in the soul! For
indeed there it is all mist, all storm, all darkness, great the uproar of the thoughts,
at being so thronged and crushed, the soul itself crying out at the abuse done to
it: all (the parts and faculties) complaining of one another, beseeching,
entreating, that the filth may be discharged somewhere. And after it is flung out,
still the turmoil is not at an end; but then comes fever and diseases. "And how
comes it," say you, "that one may see these luxurious livers, in goodly plight,
riding on horseback? What idle talk is this," say you, "to tell us of diseases? It is
I that am diseased, I that am racked, I that am disgusting, while I have nothing
to eat." Ah me! For one may well lament at such words. But the sufferers with
the gout, the men that are carried on litters, the men that are swathed with
bandages, from what class of people, I ask you, shall we see these? And indeed,
were it not that they would deem it an insult, and think my words opprobrious, I
would before now have addressed them even by name. "But there are some of
them, who are in good health as well." Because they give themselves not merely
to luxurious living, but also to labors. Else show me a man, who does nothing
whatever but fatten himself, free from pain as he lies there, without an anxious
thought. For though a host of physicians without number came together, they
would not be able to rescue him from his diseases. It is not in the nature of
things. For I will hold you a medical discourse. Of the matters sent down into the
belly, not all becomes nourishment; since even in the food itself, not all is
nutritive, but part of it in the process of digestion passes into stool, part is turned
into nourishment. If then in the process of digestion the operation is perfect, this
is the result, and each finds its proper place; the wholesome and useful part
betakes itself to its appropriate place, while that which is superfluous and
useless, withdraws itself, and passes off. But if it be in too great quantity, then
even the nutritive part of it becomes hurtful. And, to speak by way of example,
in order that my meaning may be clearer to you: in wheat part is fine flour, part
meal, part bran: now if the mill be able to grind (what is put in), it separates all
these: but if you put in too much, all becomes mixed up together. Wine again, if

it go through its proper process of formation, and under due influence of the
seasons, then, whereas at first all is mixed together, anon part settles into lees,
part rises into scum, part remains for enjoyment to those that use it, and this is
the good part, and will not readily undergo any change. But what they call
"nourishment," is neither wine, nor lees, while all are mixed up together.— The
same may be seen in the river, when its waters make a whirling flood. As at such
time we see the fishes floating at top, dead, their eyes first blinded by the muddy
slime: so is it with us. For when gormandizing, like a flood of rain, has drenched
the inward parts, it puts all in a whirl, and makes that the faculties ([λογισμοὶ]),
healthy till then and living in a pure element, drift lifeless on the surface. Since
then by all these examples we have shown how great the mischief is, let us cease
to count these men happy for that, for which we ought to think them wretched,
and to bemoan ourselves for that, for which we ought to count ourselves happy,
and let us welcome sufficiency with a contented mind. Or do you not hear even
what physicians tell you, that "want is the mother of health?" But what I say is,
that want is mother, not of bodily health, but also of that of the soul. These
things Paul also, that physician indeed, cries aloud; when he says, "Having food
and raiment, let us therewith be content." [1 Timothy 6:8] Let us therefore do as
he bids us, that so, being in sound health, we may perform the work that we
ought to do, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.