different species. Thus one and the same fruit, as to its color, is
contained under one species, i.e. a white thing: and, as to its
perfume, under the species of sweet-smelling things. In like manner
an action which, as to its substance, is in one natural species,
considered in respect to the moral conditions that are added to it,
can belong to two species, as stated above (Question 1, Article 3, ad
3).
Reply to Objection 2: The end is last in execution; but first in the
intention of the reason, in regard to which moral actions receive their
species.
Reply to Objection 3: Difference is compared to genus as form to
matter, inasmuch as it actualizes the genus. On the other hand, the
genus is considered as more formal than the species, inasmuch as it
is something more absolute and less contracted. Wherefore also the
parts of a definition are reduced to the genus of formal cause, as is
stated in Phys. ii, 3. And in this sense the genus is the formal cause
of the species; and so much the more formal, as it is more universal.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether any action is indifferent in its species?

Objection 1: It would seem that no action is indifferent in its species.
For evil is the privation of good, according to Augustine (Enchiridion
xi). But privation and habit are immediate contraries, according to
the Philosopher (Categor. viii). Therefore there is not such thing as
an action that is indifferent in its species, as though it were between
good and evil.
Objection 2: Further, human actions derive their species from their
end or object, as stated above (Article 6; Question 1, Article 3). But
every end and every object is either good or bad. Therefore every
human action is good or evil according to its species. None,
therefore, is indifferent in its species.
Objection 3: Further, as stated above (Article 1), an action is said to
be good, when it has its due complement of goodness; and evil,
when it lacks that complement. But every action must needs either
have the entire plenitude of its goodness, or lack it in some respect.
Therefore every action must needs be either good or bad in its
species, and none is indifferent.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 18) that
"there are certain deeds of a middle kind, which can be done with a
good or evil mind, of which it is rash to form a judgment." Therefore
some actions are indifferent according to their species.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 2,5), every action takes its
species from its object; while human action, which is called moral,
takes its species from the object, in relation to the principle of
human actions, which is the reason. Wherefore if the object of an
action includes something in accord with the order of reason, it will
be a good action according to its species; for instance, to give alms
to a person in want. On the other hand, if it includes something
repugnant to the order of reason, it will be an evil act according to its
species; for instance, to steal, which is to appropriate what belongs
to another. But it may happen that the object of an action does not
include something pertaining to the order of reason; for instance, to
pick up a straw from the ground, to walk in the fields, and the like:
and such actions are indifferent according to their species.