yourself enjoy rewards without number, set your own life in order, and make it
shine forth upon all sides, "that men may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven." For so we also shall enjoy that unutterable and great
glory, which God grant that we may all attain to, by the grace and love toward
man, etc.

## Homily 27 on Romans

Rom. XIV. 25-27
" Now to Him that is of power to establish you according to my Gospel, and
the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the revelation of the mystery, which
was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest, and
(manuscripts [τε] which Sav. omits) by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according
to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the
obedience of faith: to God only wise, to Him be glory through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen."
It is always a custom with Paul to conclude his exhortation with prayers and
doxologies. For he knows that the thing is one of no slight importance. And it is
out of affectionateness and caution that he is in the habit of doing this. For it is
the character of a teacher devoted to his children, and to God, not to instruct
them in words only, but by prayer too to bring upon his teaching the assistance
which is from God. And this he does here also. But the connection is as follows:
"To Him that is of power to establish you, be glory for ever. Amen." For he again
clings to those weak brethren, and to them he directs his discourse. For when he
was rebuking, he made all share his rebuke; but now, when he is praying, it is for
these that he wears the attitude of a suppliant. And after saying, "to establish,"
he proceeds to give the mode of it, "according to my Gospel;" and this was what
one would do to show that as yet they were not firmly fixed, but stood, though
with wavering. Then to give a trustworthiness to what he says, he proceeds, "and
the preaching of Jesus Christ;" that is, which He Himself preached. But if He
preached it, the doctrines are not ours, but the laws are of Him. And afterwards,
in discussing the nature of the preaching, He shows that this gift is one of much
benefit, and of much honor; and this he first proves from the person of the
declarer thereof, and then likewise from the things declared. For it was glad

tidings. Besides, from His not having made anything of them known to any
before us. And this he intimates in the words, "according to the revelation of the
mystery." And this is a sign of the greatest friendliness, to make us share in the
mysteries, and no one before us. "Which was kept secret since the world began,
but now is made manifest." For it had been determined long ago, but was only
manifested now. How was it made manifest? "By the Scriptures of the Prophets."
Here again he is releasing the weak person from fear. For what do you fear? Is it
lest thou depart from the Law? This the Law wishes, this it foretold from of old.
But if you pry into the cause of its being made manifest now, you are doing a
thing not safe to do, in being curious about the mysteries of God, and calling
Him to account. For we ought not with things of this nature to act as busybodies,
but to be well pleased and content with them. Wherefore that he might himself
put a check upon a spirit of this sort, he adds, "according to the commandment of
the everlasting God, for the obedience of faith." For faith requires obedience,
and not curiosity. And when God commands, one ought to be obedient, not
curious. Then he uses another argument to encourage them, saying "made known
to all nations." That is, it is not thou alone but the whole world that is of this
Creed, as having had not man, but God for a Teacher. Wherefore also he adds,
"through Jesus Christ." But it was not only made known, but also confirmed.
Now both are His work. And on this ground too the way it is to be read is, "Now
to Him that is of power to establish you through Jesus Christ;" and, as I was
saying, he ascribes them both to Him; or rather, not both of these only, but the
glory belonging (or ascribed, Gr. [τὴν εἰς]) to the Father also. And this too is
why he said, "to Whom be glory forever, Amen." And he uses a doxology again
through awe at the incomprehensibleness of these mysteries. For even now they
have appeared, there is no such thing as comprehending them by reasonings, but
it is by faith we must come to a knowledge of them, for in no other way can we.
He well says, "To the only wise God." For if you will only reflect how He
brought the nations in, and blended them with those who in olden time had
wrought well, how He saved those who were desperate, how He brought men