it is impossible that the thought (EnnÏa) of any one, or his silence (Sige), should be understood
apart from himself; and that, being sent forth beyond him, it should possess a special figure of its
own. But if they assert that the (EnnÏa) was not sent forth beyond Him, but continued one with
the Propator, why then do they reckon her with the other Æons —with those who were not one
[with the Father], and are on this account ignorant of His greatness? If, however, she was so united
(let us take this also into consideration), there is then an absolute necessity, that from this united
and inseparable conjunction, which constitutes but one being, there should proceed an unseparated
and united production, so that it should not be dissimilar to Him who sent it forth. But if this be so,
then just as Bythus and Sige, so also Nous and Aletheia will form one and the same being, ever
cleaving mutually together. And inasmuch as the one cannot be conceived of without the other,
just as water cannot [be conceived of] without [the thought of] moisture, or fire without [the thought
of] heat, or a stone without [the thought] of hardness (for these things are mutually bound together,
and the one cannot be separated from the other, but always co-exists with it), so it behoves Bythus
to be united in the same way with EnnÏa, and Nous with Aletheia. Logos and Zoe again, as being
sent forth by those that are thus united, ought themselves to be united, and to constitute only one
being. But, according to such a process of reasoning, Homo and Ecclesia too, and indeed all the
remaining conjunctions of the Æons produced, ought to be united, and always to co-exist, the one
with the other. For there is a necessity in their opinion, that a female Æon should exist side by side
with a male one, inasmuch as she is, so to speak, [the forthputting of] his affection.
3. These things being so, and such opinions being proclaimed by them, they again venture,
without a blush, to teach that the younger Æon of the Duodecad, whom they also style Sophia, did,
apart from union with her consort, whom they call Theletus, endure passion, and separately, without
any assistance from him, gave birth to a production which they name "a female from a female."
They thus rush into such utter frenzy, as to form two most clearly opposite opinions respecting the
same point. For if Bythus is ever one with Sige, Nous with Aletheia, Logos with Zoe, and so on,
as respects the rest, how could Sophia, without union with her consort, either suffer or generate
anything? And if, again, she did really suffer passion apart from him, it necessarily follows that
the other conjunctions also admit of disjunction and separation among themselves,—a thing which
I have already shown to be impossible. It is also impossible, therefore, that Sophia suffered passion
apart from Theletus; and thus, again, their whole system of argument is overthrown. For they have
yet again derived the whole of remaining [material substance], like the composition of a tragedy,
from that passion which they affirm she experienced apart from union with her consort.
4. If, however, they impudently maintain, in order to preserve from ruin their vain imaginations,
that the rest of the conjunctions also were disjoined and separated from one another on account of
this latest conjunction, then [I reply that], in the first place, they rest upon a thing which is impossible.
For how can they separate the Propator from his EnnÏa, or Nous from Aletheia, or Logos from