persons, as surely He is not, why can it be that of one He exacts a penalty, but
another He suffers to go away unpunished? Why, this is again more inexplicable
than the former."
Yet if you are willing to hear what we say with candor, we will solve this
difficulty also.
What then is the solution? He neither exacts penalty of all here, lest you
should despair of the resurrection, and lose all expectation of the judgment, as
though all were to give account here; nor does He suffer all to go away
unpunished, lest on the other hand you should account all to be without His
providence; but He both punishes and abstains from punishing: by those whom
He punishes, signifying that in that world also He will exact a penalty of such as
are unpunished here; and by those whom He does not punish, working upon you
to believe that there is some fearful trial after our departure hence.
But if He were altogether indifferent about our former deeds, He neither
would have punished any here, nor have conferred benefits. But now you see
Him for your sake stretching out the heaven, kindling the sun, founding the
earth, pouring forth the sea, expanding the air, and appointing for the moon her
courses, setting unchangeable laws for the seasons of the years, and all other
things too performing their own courses exactly at a sign from Him. For both our
nature, and that of creatures irrational, of them that creep, that walk, that fly, that
swim, in marshes, in springs, in rivers, in mountains, in forests, in houses, in the
air, in plains; plants also, and seeds, and trees, both wild and cultivated, both
fruitful and unfruitful; and all things in general, moved by that unwearied Hand,
make provision for our life, affording to us of themselves their ministry, not for
our need only, but also for our feeling of high station.
Seeing therefore order so great and fair (and yet we have not mentioned so
much as the least portion thereof), do you dare say, that He who for your sake
has wrought things so many and great will overlook you in the most critical
points, and suffer you when dead to lie with the asses and swine: and that having
honored you with so great a gift, that of godliness, whereby He has even equaled

you with the angels, He will overlook you after your countless labors and toils?
And how can this be reasonable? Why, these things, if we be silent "the
stones will immediately cry out;" [Luke 19:40] so plain are they, and manifest,
and more lucid than the sunbeam itself.
Having then considered all these things, and having convinced our own
soul, that after our departure hence, we shall both stand at the fearful judgmentseat, and give account of all that we have done, and shall bear our penalty, and
submit to our sentence, if we continue in our negligences; and shall receive
crowns and unutterable blessings, if we are willing to give a little heed to
ourselves; let us both stop the mouths of them who gainsay these things, and
ourselves choose the way of virtue; that with due confidence departing to that
tribunal, we may attain unto the good things that are promised us, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and dominion,
now and ever, world without end. Amen.