THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.2.

The cause of honor is that by reason of which the person honored
has a certain excellence. for honor is reverence given to something
on account of its excellence, as stated in the SS, Question 103,
Article 1. If therefore in one man there are several causes of honor,
for instance, rank, knowledge, and virtue, the honor given to him will
be one in respect of the person honored, but several in respect of
the causes of honor: for it is the man that is honored, both on
account of knowledge and by reason of his virtue.
Since, therefore, in Christ there is but one Person of the Divine and
human natures, and one hypostasis, and one suppositum, He is
given one adoration and one honor on the part of the Person adored:
but on the part of the cause for which He is honored, we can say that
there are several adorations, for instance that He receives one honor
on account of His uncreated knowledge, and another on account of
His created knowledge.
But if it be said that there are several persons or hypostases in
Christ, it would follow that there would be, absolutely speaking,
several adorations. And this is what is condemned in the Councils.
For it is written in the chapters of Cyril [Council of Ephesus, Part I,
ch. 26]: "If anyone dare to say that the man assumed should be
adored besides the Divine Word, as though these were distinct
persons; and does not rather honor the Emmanuel with one single
adoration, inasmuch as the Word was made flesh; let him be
anathema."
Reply to Objection 1: In the Trinity there are three Who are honored,
but only one cause of honor. In the mystery of the Incarnation it is
the reverse: and therefore only one honor is given to the Trinity and
only one to Christ, but in a different way.
Reply to Objection 2: Operation is not the object but the motive of
honor. And therefore there being two operations in Christ proves,
not two adorations, but two causes of adoration.
Reply to Objection 3: If the soul of Christ were not united to the Word
of God, it would be the principal thing in that Man. Wherefore honor
would be due to it principally, since man is that which is principal in
him [Ethic. ix, 8]. But since Christ's soul is united to a Person of
greater dignity, to that Person is honor principally due to Whom
Christ's soul is united. Nor is the dignity of Christ's soul hereby

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.2.

diminished, but rather increased, as stated above (Question 2,
Article 2, ad 2).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ's humanity should be adored with

the adoration of "latria"?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's soul should not be adored
with the adoration of "latria." For on the words of Ps. 98:5, "Adore
His foot-stool for it is holy," a gloss says: "The flesh assumed by the
Word of God is rightly adored by us: for no one partakes spiritually
of His flesh unless he first adore it; but not indeed with the adoration
called 'latria,' which is due to the Creator alone." Now the flesh is
part of the humanity. Therefore Christ's humanity is not to be adored
with the adoration of "latria."
Objection 2: Further, the worship of "latria" is not to be given to any
creature: since for this reason were the Gentiles reproved, that they
"worshiped and served the creature," as it is written (Rm. 1:25). But
Christ's humanity is a creature. Therefore it should not be adored
with the adoration of "latria."
Objection 3: Further, the adoration of "latria" is due to God in
recognition of His supreme dominion, according to Dt. 6:13: "Thou
shalt adore the Lord thy God, and shalt serve Him only." But Christ
as man is less than the Father. Therefore His humanity is not to be
adored with the adoration of "latria."
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 3): "On account
of the incarnation of the Divine Word, we adore the flesh of Christ
not for its own sake, but because the Word of God is united thereto
in person." And on Ps. 98:5, "Adore His foot-stool," a gloss says:
"He who adores the body of Christ, regards not the earth, but rather
Him whose foot-stool it is, in Whose honor he adores the foot-stool."
But the incarnate Word is adored with the adoration of "latria."
Therefore also His body or His humanity.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1) adoration is due to the
subsisting hypostasis: yet the reason for honoring may be
something non-subsistent, on account of which the person, in whom
it is, is honored. And so the adoration of Christ's humanity may be
understood in two ways. First, so that the humanity is the thing
adored: and thus to adore the flesh of Christ is nothing else than to
adore the incarnate Word of God: just as to adore a King's robe is
nothing else than to adore a robed King. And in this sense the