the sick to health by availing themselves of deceit, and blending the assistance
which they derive from it with their art. For when the waywardness of the
patient and the obstinacy of the complaint baffle the counsels of the physicians,
it is then necessary to put on the mask of deceit in order that, as on the stage,
they may be able to hide what really takes place. But, if you please, I will relate
to you one instance of stratagem out of many which I have heard of being
contrived by the sons of the healing art. A man was once suddenly attacked by a
fever of great severity; the burning heat increased, and the patient rejected the
remedies which could have reduced it and craved for a draught of pure wine,
passionately entreating all who approached to give it him and enable him to
satiate this deadly craving— I say deadly, for if any one had gratified this request
he would not only have exasperated the fever, but also have driven the unhappy
man frantic. Thereupon, professional skill being baffled, and at the end of its
resources and utterly thrown away, stratagem stepped in and displayed its power
in the way which I will now relate. For the physician took an earthen cup
brought straight out of the furnace, and having steeped it in wine, then drew it
out empty, filled it with water, and, having ordered the chamber where the sick
man lay to be darkened with curtains that the light might not reveal the trick, he
gave it him to drink, pretending that it was filled with undiluted wine. And the
man, before he had taken it in his hands, being deceived by the smell, did not
wait to examine what was given him, but convinced by the odor, and deceived
by the darkness, eagerly gulped down the draught, and being satiated with it
immediately shook off the feeling of suffocation and escaped the imminent peril.
Do you see the advantage of deceit? And if any one were to reckon up all the
tricks of physicians the list would run on to an indefinite length. And not only
those who heal the body but those also who attend to the diseases of the soul
may be found continually making use of this remedy. Thus the blessed Paul
attracted those multitudes of Jews: [Acts 21:26] with this purpose he
circumcised Timothy, although he warned the Galatians in his letter
[Galatians 5:2] that Christ would not profit those who were circumcised. For this

cause he submitted to the law, although he reckoned the righteousness which
came from the law but loss after receiving the faith in Christ. [Philippians 3:7]
For great is the value of deceit, provided it be not introduced with a mischievous
intention. In fact action of this kind ought not to be called deceit, but rather a
kind of good management, cleverness and skill, capable of finding out ways
where resources fail, and making up for the defects of the mind. For I would not
call Phinees a murderer, although he slew two human beings with one stroke:
[Numbers 25:7] nor yet Elias after the slaughter of the 100 soldiers, and the
captain, [2 Kings 1:9-12] and the torrents of blood which he caused to be shed
by the destruction of those who sacrificed to devils. [1 Kings 18:34] For if we
were to concede this, and to examine the bare deeds in themselves apart from the
intention of the doers, one might if he pleased judge Abraham guilty of childmurder [Genesis 22:3] and accuse his grandson and descendant [Exodus 11:2] of
wickedness and guile. For the one got possession of the birthright, and the other
transferred the wealth of the Egyptians to the host of the Israelites. But this is not
the case: away with the audacious thought! For we not only acquit them of
blame, but also admire them because of these things, since even God
commended them for the same. For that man would fairly deserve to be called a
deceiver who made an unrighteous use of the practice, not one who did so with a
salutary purpose. And often it is necessary to deceive, and to do the greatest
benefits by means of this device, whereas he who has gone by a straight course
has done great mischief to the person whom he has not deceived.