scar of the wounds does He suffer to appear. Yea, and though we be come to that
depth of misery into which he fell, who devoured his father's substance and fed
upon husks, and should repent, we are undoubtedly saved. And though we owe
ten thousand talents, if we fall down before God and bear no malice, all things
are forgiven us. Although we have wandered away to that place whither the
sheep strayed from his keeper, even thence He recovers us again: only let us be
willing, beloved. For God is merciful. Wherefore both in the case of him that
owed ten thousand talents, He was content with His falling down before Him;
and in the case of him who had devoured his father's goods, with his return only;
and in the case of the sheep, with its willingness to be borne.
7. Considering therefore the greatness of His mercy, let us here make Him
propitious unto us, and "let us come before His face by a full confession," [Psalm
95:2. Septuagint] that we may not depart hence without excuse, and have to
endure the extreme punishment. For if in the present life we exhibit even an
ordinary diligence, we shall gain the greatest rewards: but if we depart having
become nothing better here, even though we repent ever so earnestly there it will
do us no good. For it was our duty to strive while yet remaining within the lists,
not after the assembly was broken up idly to lament and weep: as that rich man
did, bewailing and deploring himself, but to no purpose and in vain, since he
overlooked the time in which he ought to have done these things. And not he
alone, but many others there are like him now among the rich; not willing to
despise wealth, but despising their own souls for wealth's sake: at whom I cannot
but wonder, when I see men continually interceding with God for mercy, while
they are doing themselves incurable harm, and unsparing of their very soul as if
it were an enemy. Let us not then trifle, beloved, let us not trifle nor delude
ourselves, beseeching God to have mercy upon us, while we ourselves prefer
both money and luxury, and, in fact, all things to this mercy. For neither, if any
one brought before you a case and said in accusation of such an one, that being
to suffer ten thousand deaths and having it in his power to rid himself of the
sentence by a little money, he chose rather to die than to give up any of his

property, would you say that he was worthy of any mercy or compassion. Now
in this same way do thou also reason touching yourself. For we too act in this
way, and making light of our own salvation, we are sparing of our money. How
then do you beseech God to spare you, when you yourself art so unsparing of
yourself, and honorest money above your soul?
Wherefore also I am greatly astonished to see, how great witchery lies hid
in wealth, or rather not in wealth, but in the souls of those that are beguiled. For
there are, there are those that utterly derided this sorcery. For which among the
things therein is really capable of bewitching us? Is it not inanimate matter? Is it
not transitory? Is not the possession thereof unworthy of trust? Is it not full of
fears and? Dangers? Nay, of murders and conspiracy? Of enmity and hatred? Of
carelessness and much vice? Is it not dust and ashes? What madness have we
here? What disease?
"But," say you, "we ought not merely to bring such accusations against
those that are so diseased, but also to destroy the passion." And in what other
way shall we destroy it, except by pointing out its baseness and how full it is of
innumerable evils?
But of this it is not easy to persuade a lover concerning the objects of his
love. Well then, we must set before him another sort of beauty. But incorporeal
beauty he sees not, being yet in his disease. Well then, let us show him some
beauty of a corporeal kind, and say to him, Consider the meadows and the
flowers therein, which are more sparkling than any gold, and more elegant and
transparent than all kinds of precious stones. Consider the limpid streams from
their fountains, the rivers which like oil flow noiselessly out of the earth. Ascend
to heaven and behold the lustre of the sun, the beauty of the moon, the stars that
cluster like flowers. "Why, what is this," say you, "since we do not, I suppose,
make use of them as of wealth?" Nay, we use them more than wealth, inasmuch
as the use thereof is more needful, the enjoyment more secure. For you have no
fear, lest, like money, any one should take them and go off: but you may be ever
confident of having them, and that without anxiety or care. But if you grieve