SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.9.

Rustic. Monach., Ep. cxxv): "Far from condemning the solitary life,
we have often commended it. But we wish the soldiers who pass
from the monastic school to be such as not to be deterred by the
hard noviciate of the desert, and such as have given proof of their
conduct for a considerable time.
Accordingly, just as that which is already perfect surpasses that
which is being schooled in perfection, so the life of the solitaries, if
duly practiced, surpasses the community life. But if it be undertaken
without the aforesaid practice, it is fraught with very great danger,
unless the grace of God supply that which others acquire by
practice, as in the case of the Blessed Antony and the Blessed
Benedict.
Reply to Objection 1: Solomon shows that two are better than one,
on account of the help which one affords the other either by "lifting
him" up, or by "warming him," i.e. giving him spiritual heat (Eccles.
4:10,11). But those who have already attained to perfection do not
require this help.
Reply to Objection 2: According to 1 Jn. 4:16, "He that abideth in
charity abideth in God and God in him." Wherefore just as Christ is
in the midst of those who are united together in the fellowship of
brotherly love, so does He dwell in the heart of the man who devotes
himself to divine contemplation through love of God.
Reply to Objection 3: Actual obedience is required of those who
need to be schooled according to the direction of others in the
attainment of perfection; but those who are already perfect are
sufficiently "led by the spirit of God" so that they need not to obey
others actually. Nevertheless they have obedience in the
preparedness of the mind.
Reply to Objection 4: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 19), "no
one is forbidden to seek the knowledge of truth, for this pertains to a
praiseworthy leisure." That a man be placed "on a candlestick," does
not concern him but his superiors, and "if this burden is not placed
on us," as Augustine goes on to say (De Civ. Dei xix, 19), "we must
devote ourselves to the contemplation of truth," for which purpose
solitude is most helpful. Nevertheless, those who lead a solitary life
are most useful to mankind. Hence, referring to them, Augustine
says (De Morib. Eccl. xxxi): "They dwell in the most lonely places,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.9.

content to live on water and the bread that is brought to them from
time to time, enjoying colloquy with God to whom they have adhered
with a pure mind. To some they seem to have renounced human
intercourse more than is right: but these understand not how much
such men profit us by the spirit of their prayers, what an example to
us is the life of those whom we are forbidden to see in the body."
Reply to Objection 5: A man may lead a solitary life for two motives.
one is because he is unable, as it were, to bear with human
fellowship on account of his uncouthness of mind; and this is beastlike. The other is with a view to adhering wholly to divine things; and
this is superhuman. Hence the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 1) that "he
who associates not with others is either a beast or a god," i.e. a
godly man.