February 2 I. Again, in the second part of the 'Diary' there appear a number of new phenomena, principal among them being the 'reverence and respect', which, the saint has come to feel, 'should be shown on going to mass when I had to pronounce the name of God our Lord etc.' (March I4). The mystery of the Trinity seems to have presented ever-new facets as the spiritual life of Ignatius progressed. Allied to this growth, and forming an organic part with it, is the mystery of the mass. Here, too, the Diary presents us not with an isolated strand of Autobiography ch 3, no 28. ## The mystical gifts

Outstanding among the personal traits that the Diary presents is a feature which is adumbrated in the Exercises but which also escapes notice if not placed against the background of the Diary. In the second and third points of the 'Contemplation to obtain love', attention is drawn to God's indwelling in created things, and to the fact 'that he works and toils on my behalf in all created things', This attention to the presence of God is actively practised at the start of each meditation. An attitude of mind is built up which comes to maturity through the 'Contemplation', and finds in this exercise its natural, and eventually its supernatural, complement. It is remarkable how often in the Diary it is the ordinary events of the day which are suddenly illuminated and transfigured by the rush of grace. It is as the saint is having his midday meal that he receives the final decisive consolations, and it is in the middle of grace (surely the most routine of all spiritual duties [) that he has a vision of God the Father: When I sat at table.., the tempter tried, without success, to make me have doubts... Suddenly, yet calmly - like a man who has won - I said to him, 'Get to your place!' Tears came to strengthen me and I felt quite sure about all I had decided... When I said ~s The study by Dr Suquia, supra, n 93, labours slightly from the initial supposition that the Diary is only a 'diary', 'in which the saint during thirteen months gathered the deepest impressions that he had experienced while celebrating the holy mysteries' (loc. tit.). The Diary is much more: it is essentially an instrument forged to facilitate a particularly difficult election i~ accord with Ignatius' instructions in the Exercises. In consequence, Dr Suquia has difficulty in explaining the lacuna concerning the social function of the mass.9 The gap is only partly filled by the pioneer work of H. Rahner, Ignatius the Theologian (London, 1968 ). For a study of Ignatius' letters, Cf I. Iparraguirre, Espiritu de San Ignacio (Bilbao, ~958)- ~o Exx 236. grace after the meal, the Being of the Father partly disclosed itself, also the Being of the blessed Trinity: I felt a spiritual impulse to devotion and tears such as I had not felt or seen all day. March 12. When he is out walking in the streets of Rome, the supernatural world breaks in upon him with the same intensity as when he is saying mass: Today, even when walking in the city, I felt great joy of heart, and on seeing three rational creatures together, or three animals, or three other things, the blessed Trinity was brought before me. February 19. Even in the celebration of mass, it is not only at the culminating points, the canon or the communion, that his prayer receives its special graces, but at such times as the Confiteor (February 25), or the Epistle (February I7). The consolation of God, he notes in the Exercises,81 has the characteristic that it enters the soul without previous warning, for the Creator has the right to enter and leave his house without any preliminary knocking. However, his entries in the Diary testify to the emotion this sudden onslaught of devotion can cause, leaving Ignatius gasping for breath, and hugging his chest to relieve the anguish: After I had gone to bed, I had special consolation in thinking of the three Persons, hugging myself'for the exultation in my soul... [The following morning] While saying mass I was not weeping, yet not entirely without tears, feeling a certain warm devotion, glowing as it were; also many little gasps full of great devotion. February I8. •.. during prayer I wept much, the tears streaming down my face. A very intense devotion lasted for a while, my mind enlightened or my memory quickened by the blessed Trinity. I was at peace and felt such joy that there was a pressure in my chest 82 for the intense love I was experiencing in the blessed Trinity. February 19. Constant prayer is of course a special gift of God. The Diary provides first-hand evidence that Ignatius had been given this gift, at least at certain periods of his life. In the Autobiography, he says quite plainly that the special gifts of contemplative prayer were not always granted him; but in his early years at Manresa, after his studies when he moved to Venice, and during these months when he was preparing himself for the composition of the Constitutions, he seems to have received unusually varied spiritual consolations. Thus, although it is likely that among the personal papers destroyed before his death there was mention of great graces, there are two pieces of evidence to prove that the graces recorded in the Diary were quite exceptional. The first is the document written by Ignatius himself, which appeared so