John 9:15
"He put clay upon my eyes, and I washed, and do see."
Because the slander was now become great, and the Jews had said, "Behold
what work Jesus does on the Sabbath day, he anoints with clay!" But observe, I
pray you, how the blind man is not disturbed. When being questioned he spoke
in the presence of those others without danger, it was no such great thing to tell
the truth, but the wonder is, that now when he is placed in a situation of greater
fear, he neither denies nor contradicts what he had said before. What then did the
Pharisees, or rather what did the others also? They had brought him (to the
Pharisees), as being about to deny; but, on the contrary, that befell them which
they desired not, and they learned more exactly. And this they everywhere have
to endure, in the case of miracles; but this point we will more clearly
demonstrate in what follows. What said the Pharisees?

John 9:16
"Some said," (not all, but the more forward,) "This man is not of God, because
he keeps not the Sabbath day; others said, How can a man that is a sinner do
such miracles?"
Do you see that they were led up by the miracles? For hear what they say
now, who before this had sent to bring Him. And if all did not so, (for being
rulers through vainglory they fell into unbelief,) yet still the greater number even
of the rulers believed on Him, but confessed Him not. Now the multitude was
easily overlooked, as being of no great account in their synagogue, but the rulers
being more conspicuous had the greater difficulty in speaking boldly, or some
the love of rule restrained, others cowardice, and the fear of the many.
Wherefore also He said, "How can you believe who receive honor from men?"
[John 5:44] And these who were seeking to kill Him unjustly said that they were
of God, but that He who healed the blind could not be of God, because He kept
not the Sabbath; to which the others objected, that a sinner could not do such
miracles. Those first maliciously keeping silence about what had taken place,
brought forward the seeming transgression; for they said not, "He heals on the
Sabbath day," but, "He keeps not the Sabbath." These, on the other hand, replied
weakly, for when they ought to have shown that the Sabbath was not broken,
they rely only upon the miracles; and with reason, for they still thought that He
was a man. If this had not been the case, they might besides have urged in His
defense, that He was Lord of the Sabbath which Himself had made, but as yet
they had not this opinion. Anyhow, none of them dared to say what he wished
openly, or in the way of an assertion, but only in the way of doubt, some from
not having boldness of speech, others through love of rule.
"There was therefore a division among them." This division first began
among the people, then later among the rulers also, and some said, "He is a good
man"; others, "Nay, but he deceives the people." [John 7:12] Do you see that the