things are done." They said not, Did not we tell you even then, that "we cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard?" [Acts 4:20] for they are
not contentious for glory; but they repeat again the same story—the Cross, the
Resurrection. And they tell not, wherefore He was crucified— that it was for our
sakes: but they hint at this indeed, but not openly as yet, wishing to terrify them
awhile. And yet what sort of rhetoric is here? None at all, but everywhere it is
still the Passion, and the Resurrection and the Ascension, and the end wherefore:
"The God of our fathers raised up Jesus," etc. (v. 30, 31.) And yet what
improbable assertions are these! Very improbable, no doubt; but for all that, not
rulers, not people, had a word to say against them: but those had their mouths
stopped, and these received the teaching. "And we," says he, "are witnesses of
these things." [Acts 5:32] Of what things? Of His having promised forgiveness
and repentance: for the Resurrection indeed was acknowledged, now. But that
He gives forgiveness, both we are witnesses, and "so is the Holy Ghost," Who
would not have come down, unless sins had been first remitted: so that this is an
indisputable proof. "When they heard that, they were cut" (to the heart), "and
took counsel to slay them." [Acts 5:33] Do you hear of the forgiveness of sins, O
wretched man, and that God does not demand punishment, and do you wish to
slay them? What wickedness was this! And yet, either they ought to have
convicted them of lying, or if they could not do that, to have believed: but if they
did not choose to believe, yet they ought not to slay them. For what was there
deserving of death? Such was their intoxication, they did not even see what had
taken place. Observe, how everywhere the Apostles, when they have made
mention of the crime, add the mention of forgiveness; showing, that while what
had been done was worthy of death, that which was given was proffered to them
as to benefactors! In what other way could any one have persuaded them?
"Then stood up the high-priest," etc. As men in high repute, these (the
Apostles) were about to take their place near to the Prophets. The Sadducees
were they that were most sore on the subject of the Resurrection. But perchance
some one will say: Why, what man, endowed with such gifts as the Apostles

were, would not have been great? But consider, I pray you, how, before that they
were endowed with the grace, "they were continuing steadfastly with one accord
in prayer" [Acts 1:14], and depending on the aid from above. And do you, my
beloved, hope for the kingdom of heaven, yet endurest naught? And have you
received the Spirit, yet sufferest not such things, nor encounterest perils? But
they, before they had breathing-time from their former dangers, were again led
into others. And even this too, that there is no arrogance, no conceit, how great a
good it is! To converse with mildness, what a gain it is! For not all that they did
was the immediate work of grace, but there are many marks of their own zeal as
well. That the gifts of grace shine forth in them, this was from their own
diligence. See, for instance, from the very beginning, how careful Peter is; how
sober and vigilant: how they that believed cast away their riches, had no private
property, continued in prayer, showed that they were of one mind, passed their
time in fastings. What grace, I ask (alone), did all this? Therefore it is that He
brings the evidence home to them through their own officers. Just as in the case
of Christ, it was their officers who said, "Never man spoke as this Man speaks."
[John 7:46] These (proofs) are more apt to be believed than the Resurrection.—
Observe also the moderation shown by (the rulers) themselves, and how they
give way. "The high-priest asked them, saying," etc. [Acts 5:27]: here he reasons
with them, forsooth, in a moderate tone; for he was frightened: indeed to hinder
was what he desired rather than to kill, since that he cannot do: and with the
view to rouse them all, and show them the extreme danger they are in, "And
intend," says he (to the Apostles), "to bring this man's blood upon us." Do you
still take Him to be but man? He wants to make it appear that the injunction was
necessary for their own safety. But mark what (Peter) says: "Him has God
exalted with His right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins." [Acts 5:31] Here he forbears to mention the
Gentiles, not to give them a handle against him. "And they desired," it says, "to
slay them." [Acts 5:33] See again these in perplexity, these in pain: but those in
quiet and cheerfulness and delight. It is not merely, They were grieved, but