pray for you"? [1 Samuel 12:23] Did they not all perish? Do prayers then, you
say, profit nothing? They profit even greatly: but it is when we also do
something. For prayers indeed coöperate and assist, but a man coöperates with
one that is operating, and assists one that is himself also working. But if you
remain idle, you will receive no great benefit.
For if prayers had power to bring us to the kingdom while we do nothing,
why do not all the Greeks become Christians? Do we not pray for all the world?
Did not Paul also do this? Do we not intreat that all may be converted? Why do
not the wicked become good without contributing anything of themselves?
Prayers, then, profit greatly, when we also contribute our own parts.
Would you learn how much prayers have profited? Consider, I pray,
Cornelius, Tabitha. [Acts 10:3 and 9:36] Hear also Jacob saying to Laban,
"Except the Fear of my father had been with me, surely you had now sent me
away empty." [Genesis 31:42] Hear also God again, saying, "I will defend this
city for My own sake, and for My servant David's sake." [2 Kings 9:34] But
when? In the time of Hezekiah, who was righteous. Since if prayers availed even
for the extremely wicked, why did not God say this also when Nebuchadnezzar
came, and why did He give up the city? Because wickedness availed more.
Again, Samuel himself also prayed for the Israelites, and prevailed. But when?
When they also pleased God, then they put their enemies to flight. And what
need, you say, of prayer from another, when I myself please God? Never, O man,
say this. There is need, aye, and need of much prayer. For hear God saying
concerning the friends of Job; "And he shall pray for you, and your sin shall be
forgiven you." [Job 42:8] Because they had sinned indeed, but not a great sin.
But this just man, who then saved his friends by prayer, in the season of the Jews
was not able to save the Jews who were perishing. And that you may learn this,
hear God saying through the prophet; "If Noah, Daniel, and Job stood, they shall
not deliver their sons and their daughters." [Ezekiel 14:14-16] Because
wickedness prevailed. And again, "Though Moses and Samuel stood." [Jeremiah
15:1]

And see how this is said to the two Prophets, because both prayed for them,
and did not prevail. For Ezekiel says, "Ah Lord, do you blot out the residue of
Israel?" [Ezekiel 9:8] Then showing that He does this justly, He shows him their
sins; and showing that not through despising him does He refuse to accept his
supplication for them, he says, Even these things are enough even to persuade
you, that not despising you, but on account of their many sins, I do not accept
your supplication. Nevertheless He adds, "Though. Noah, Job, and Daniel
stood." [From Ezekiel 14] And with good reason does He the rather say this to
him, because it is he who suffered so many things. Thou badest me, he says, eat
upon dung, and I ate upon it. Thou badest me, and I shaved my head. Thou
badest me, and I lay upon one side. Thou badest me go out through a hole in the
wall, bearing a burden, and I went out. Thou tookest away my wife, and badest
me not mourn, and I did not mourn, but bore it with fortitude. [Ezekiel 24:18]
Ten thousand other things have I wrought for their sake: I entreat for them, and
dost Thou not comply? Not from despising you, says he, do I do this, but though
Noah, Job, and Daniel were there, and were entreating for sons and daughters, I
would not comply.
And again to Jeremiah, who suffered less from the commandments of God,
but more from their wickedness, what does He say? "Do you see not what these
do?" [Jeremiah 7:17] "Yea," he says, "they do so— but do Thou do it for my
sake." On this account He says to him, "Though Moses and Samuel stood." Their
first lawgiver, who often delivered them from dangers, who had said, "If now
you forgive their sins, forgive it; but if not, blot me out also." [Exodus 32:32,
Septuagint] If therefore he were now alive, and spoke thus, he would not have
prevailed—nor would Samuel, again, who himself also delivered them, and who
from his earliest youth was admired. For to the former indeed I said, that I
conversed with him as a friend with a friend, and not by dark sayings. And of the
latter I said, that in his first youth I was revealed to him, and that on his account,
being prevailed upon, I opened the prophecy that had been shut up. For "the
word of the Lord," it is said, "was precious in those days; there was no open