we also are the Image of God: not indeed that which is equal to Him,
since we are made so by the Father through the Son, and not born of the
Father, as that is. And we are so, because we are enlightened with light;
but that is so, because it is the light that enlightens; and which, therefore,
being without pattern, is to us a pattern. For He does not imitate any one
going before Him, in respect to the Father, from whom He is never
separable at all, since He is the very same substance with Him from
whom He is. But we by striving imitate Him who abides, and follow Him
who stands still, and walking in Him, reach out towards Him; because He
is made for us a way in time by His humiliation, which is to us an eternal
abiding-place by His divinity. For since to pure intellectual spirits, who
have not fallen through pride, He gives an example in the form of God
and as equal with God and as God; so, in order that He might also give
Himself as an example of returning to fallen man, who on account of the
uncleanness of sins and the punishment of mortality cannot see God, "He
emptied Himself;" not by changing His own divinity, but by assuming our
changeableness: and "taking upon Him the form of a servant," "He came
to us into this world," who "was in this world," because "the world was
made by Him;" that He might be an example upwards to those who see
God, an example downwards to those who admire man, an example to
the sound to persevere, an example to the sick to be made whole, an
example to those who are to die that they may not fear, an example to the
dead that they may rise again, "that in all things He might have the preeminence." So that, because man ought not to follow any except God to
blessedness, and yet cannot perceive God; by following God made man,
he might follow at once Him whom he could perceive, and whom he
ought to follow. Let us then love Him and cleave to Him, by charity
spread abroad in our hearts, through the Holy Spirit which is given unto
us. It is not therefore to be wondered at, if, on account of the example
which the Image, which is equal to the Father, gives to us, in order that
we may be refashioned after the image of God, Scripture, when it speaks
of wisdom, speaks of the Son, whom we follow by living wisely; although
the Father also is wisdom, as He is both light and God.
6. The Holy Spirit also, whether we are to call Him that absolute love
which joins together Father and Son, and joins us also from beneath, that
so that is not unfitly said which is written, "God is love;" how is He not

also Himself wisdom, since He is light, because "God is light"? or whether
after any other way the essence of the Holy Spirit is to be singly and
properly named; then, too, since He is God, He is certainly light; and
since He is light, He is certainly wisdom. But that the Holy Spirit is God,
Scripture proclaims by the apostle, who says, "Know ye not that ye are the
temple of God?" and immediately subjoins, "And the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you;" for God dwelleth in His own temple. For the Spirit of
God does not dwell in the temple of God as a servant, since he says more
plainly in another place, "Know ye not that your body is the temple of the
Holy Ghost which is in you, and which ye have of God, and ye are not
your own? For ye are bought with a great price: therefore glorify God in
your body." But what is wisdom, except spiritual and unchangeable light?
For yonder sun also is light, but it is corporeal; and the spiritual creature
also is light, but it is not unchangeable. Therefore the Father is light, the
Son is light, and the Holy Spirit is light; but together not three lights, but
one light. And so the Father is wisdom, the Son is wisdom, and the Holy
Spirit is wisdom, and together not three wisdoms, but one wisdom: and
because in the Trinity to be is the same as to be wise, the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, are one essence. Neither in the Trinity is it one thing to be
and another to be God; therefore the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are one
God.