SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.17.

hears the sinner's prayer if it proceed from a good natural desire, not
out of justice, because the sinner does not merit to be heard, but out
of pure mercy [Article 15, ad 1], provided however he fulfil the four
conditions given above, namely, that he beseech for himself things
necessary for salvation, piously and perseveringly.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine states (Tract. xliv super Joan.),
these words were spoken by the blind man before being anointed, i.
e. perfectly enlightened, and consequently lack authority. And yet
there is truth in the saying if it refers to a sinner as such, in which
sense also the sinner's prayer is said to be an abomination.
Reply to Objection 2: There can be no godliness in the sinner's
prayer as though his prayer were quickened by a habit of virtue: and
yet his prayer may be godly in so far as he asks for something
pertaining to godliness. Even so a man who has not the habit of
justice is able to will something just, as stated above (Question 59,
Article 2). And though his prayer is not meritorious, it can be
impetrative, because merit depends on justice, whereas impetration
rests on grace.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Article 7, ad 1) the Lord's
Prayer is pronounced in the common person of the whole Church:
and so if anyone say the Lord's Prayer while unwilling to forgive his
neighbor's trespasses, he lies not, although his words do not apply
to him personally: for they are true as referred to the person of the
Church, from which he is excluded by merit, and consequently he is
deprived of the fruit of his prayer. Sometimes, however, a sinner is
prepared to forgive those who have trespassed against him,
wherefore his prayers are heard, according to Ecclus. 28:2, "Forgive
thy neighbor if he hath hurt thee, and then shall thy sins be forgiven
to thee when thou prayest."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.18.

### ARTICLE 17. Whether the parts of prayer are fittingly

described as supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
thanksgivings?
Objection 1: It would seem that the parts of prayer are unfittingly
described as supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
thanksgivings. Supplication would seem to be a kind of adjuration.
Yet, according to Origen (Super Matth. Tract. xxxv), "a man who
wishes to live according to the gospel need not adjure another, for if
it be unlawful to swear, it is also unlawful to adjure." Therefore
supplication is unfittingly reckoned a part of prayer.
Objection 2: Further, according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. iii, 24),
"to pray is to ask becoming things of God." Therefore it is unfitting
to distinguish "prayers" from "intercessions."
Objection 3: Further, thanksgivings regard the past, while the others
regard the future. But the past precedes the future. Therefore
thanksgivings are unfittingly placed after the others.
On the contrary, suffices the authority of the Apostle (1 Tim. 2:1).
I answer that, Three conditions are requisite for prayer. First, that the
person who prays should approach God Whom he prays: this is
signified in the word "prayer," because prayer is "the raising up of
one's mind to God." The second is that there should be a petition,
and this is signified in the word "intercession." In this case
sometimes one asks for something definite, and then some say it is
"intercession" properly so called, or we may ask for some thing
indefinitely, for instance to be helped by God, or we may simply
indicate a fact, as in Jn. 11:3, "Behold, he whom Thou lovest is sick,"
and then they call it "insinuation." The third condition is the reason
for impetrating what we ask for: and this either on the part of God, or
on the part of the person who asks. The reason of impetration on the
part of God is His sanctity, on account of which we ask to be heard,
according to Dan. 9:17,18, "For Thy own sake, incline, O God, Thy
ear"; and to this pertains "supplication" [obsecratio] which means a
pleading through sacred things, as when we say, "Through Thy
nativity, deliver us, O Lord." The reason for impetration on the part of
the person who asks is "thanksgiving"; since "through giving thanks
for benefits received we merit to receive yet greater benefits," as we