FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.9.

I answer that, As stated above (Question 96, Article 6; Question 97,
Article 4), precepts admit of dispensation, when there occurs a
particular case in which, if the letter of the law be observed, the
intention of the lawgiver is frustrated. Now the intention of every
lawgiver is directed first and chiefly to the common good; secondly,
to the order of justice and virtue, whereby the common good is
preserved and attained. If therefore there by any precepts which
contain the very preservation of the common good, or the very order
of justice and virtue, such precepts contain the intention of the
lawgiver, and therefore are indispensable. For instance, if in some
community a law were enacted, such as this---that no man should
work for the destruction of the commonwealth, or betray the state to
its enemies, or that no man should do anything unjust or evil, such
precepts would not admit of dispensation. But if other precepts were
enacted, subordinate to the above, and determining certain special
modes of procedure, these latter precepts would admit of
dispensation, in so far as the omission of these precepts in certain
cases would not be prejudicial to the former precepts which contain
the intention of the lawgiver. For instance if, for the safeguarding of
the commonwealth, it were enacted in some city that from each ward
some men should keep watch as sentries in case of siege, some
might be dispensed from this on account of some greater utility.
Now the precepts of the decalogue contain the very intention of the
lawgiver, who is God. For the precepts of the first table, which direct
us to God, contain the very order to the common and final good,
which is God; while the precepts of the second table contain the
order of justice to be observed among men, that nothing undue be
done to anyone, and that each one be given his due; for it is in this
sense that we are to take the precepts of the decalogue.
Consequently the precepts of the decalogue admit of no
dispensation whatever.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher is not speaking of the natural
law which contains the very order of justice: for it is a never-failing
principle that "justice should be preserved." But he is speaking in
reference to certain fixed modes of observing justice, which fail to
apply in certain cases.
Reply to Objection 2: As the Apostle says (2 Tim. 2:13), "God
continueth faithful, He cannot deny Himself." But He would deny
Himself if He were to do away with the very order of His own justice,
since He is justice itself. Wherefore God cannot dispense a man so

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.9.

that it be lawful for him not to direct himself to God, or not to be
subject to His justice, even in those matters in which men are
directed to one another.
Reply to Objection 3: The slaying of a man is forbidden in the
decalogue, in so far as it bears the character of something undue:
for in this sense the precept contains the very essence of justice.
Human law cannot make it lawful for a man to be slain unduly. But it
is not undue for evil-doers or foes of the common weal to be slain:
hence this is not contrary to the precept of the decalogue; and such
a killing is no murder as forbidden by that precept, as Augustine
observes (De Lib. Arb. i, 4). In like manner when a man's property is
taken from him, if it be due that he should lose it, this is not theft or
robbery as forbidden by the decalogue.
Consequently when the children of Israel, by God's command, took
away the spoils of the Egyptians, this was not theft; since it was due
to them by the sentence of God. Likewise when Abraham consented
to slay his son, he did not consent to murder, because his son was
due to be slain by the command of God, Who is Lord of life and
death: for He it is Who inflicts the punishment of death on all men,
both godly and ungodly, on account of the sin of our first parent, and
if a man be the executor of that sentence by Divine authority, he will
be no murderer any more than God would be. Again Osee, by taking
unto himself a wife of fornications, or an adulterous woman, was not
guilty either of adultery or of fornication: because he took unto
himself one who was his by command of God, Who is the Author of
the institution of marriage.
Accordingly, therefore, the precepts of the decalogue, as to the
essence of justice which they contain, are unchangeable: but as to
any determination by application to individual actions---for instance,
that this or that be murder, theft or adultery, or not---in this point
they admit of change; sometimes by Divine authority alone, namely,
in such matters as are exclusively of Divine institution, as marriage
and the like; sometimes also by human authority, namely in such
matters as are subject to human jurisdiction: for in this respect men
stand in the place of God: and yet not in all respects.
Reply to Objection 4: This determination was an interpretation rather
than a dispensation. For a man is not taken to break the Sabbath, if
he does something necessary for human welfare; as Our Lord
proves (Mt. 12:3, seqq.).