1. WE must now discourse concerning wisdom; not the wisdom of God,
which without doubt is God, for His only-begotten Son is called the
wisdom of God; but we will speak of the wisdom of man, yet of true
wisdom, which is according to God, and is His true and chief worship,
which is called in Greek by one term, θεοσέβεια. And this term, as we
have already observed, when our own countrymen themselves also
wished to interpret it by a single term, was by them rendered piety,
whereas piety means more commonly what the Greeks call εὐσέβεια. But
because θεοσέβεια cannot be translated perfectly by any one word, it is

better translated by two, so as to render it rather by "the worship of God."
That this is the wisdom of man, as we have already laid down in the
twelfth book of this work, is shown by the authority of Holy Scripture, in
the book of God's servant Job, where we read that the Wisdom of God
said to man, "Behold piety, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is
knowledge;" or, as some have translated the Greek word ἐπιστήμην,
"learning," which certainly takes its name from learning,5 whence also it
may be called knowledge. For everything is learned in order that it may
be known. Although the same word, indeed, is employed in a different
sense, where any one suffers evils for his sins, that he may be corrected.
Whence is that in the Epistle to the Hebrews, "For what son is he to
whom the father giveth not discipline?" And this is still more apparent in
the same epistle: "Now no chastening7 for the present seemeth to be
joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit
of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby." Therefore God
Himself is the chiefest wisdom; but the worship of God is the wisdom of
man, of which we now speak. For "the wisdom of this world is foolishness
with God." It is in respect to this wisdom, therefore, which is the
worship of God, that Holy Scripture says, "The multitude of the wise is
the welfare of the world.". But if to dispute of wisdom belongs to wise men, what shall we do?
Shall we dare indeed to profess wisdom, lest it should be mere impudence
for ourselves to dispute about it? Shall we not be alarmed by the example
of Pythagoras?—who dared not profess to be a wise man, but answered
that he was a philosopher, i.e., a lover of wisdom; whence arose the name,
that became thenceforth so much the popular name, that no matter how
great the learning wherein any one excelled, either in his own opinion or
that of others, in things pertaining to wisdom, he was still called nothing
more than philosopher. Or was it for this reason that no one, even of such
as these, dared to profess himself a wise man,—because they imagined
that a wise man was one without sin? But our Scriptures do not say this,
which say, "Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee." For doubtless he
who thinks a man ought to be rebuked, judges him to have sin. However,
for my part, I dare not profess myself a wise man even in this sense; it is
enough for me to assume, what they themselves cannot deny, that to
dispute of wisdom belongs also to the philosopher, i.e., the lover of