jurisdiction of authority, whereby those whom he absolves are
subject to him. But he can consecrate any matter determined by
Christ, nor is anything else required for the validity of the sacrament;
although, on account of a certain congruousness, the act of the
bishop is pre-required in the consecration of the altar, vestments,
and so forth. Hence it is clear that it behooves the episcopal to be
above the priestly power, as regards the priest's secondary act, but
not as regards his primary act.
Reply to Objection 1: Aaron was both priest and pontiff, that is chief
priest. Accordingly the priestly power originated from him, in so far
as he was a priest offering sacrifices, which was lawful even to the
lesser priests; but it does not originate from him as pontiff, by which
power he was able to do certain things; for instance, to enter once a
year the Holy of Holies, which it was unlawful for the other priests to
do.
Reply to Objection 2: There is no higher power with regard to this
act, but with regard to another, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as the perfections of all natural things preexist in God as their exemplar, so was Christ the exemplar of all
ecclesiastical offices. Wherefore each minister of the Church is, in
some respect, a copy of Christ, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 24).
Yet he is the higher who represents Christ according to a greater
perfection. Now a priest represents Christ in that He fulfilled a
certain ministry by Himself, whereas a bishop represents Him in that
He instituted other ministers and founded the Church. Hence it
belongs to a bishop to dedicate a thing to the Divine offices, as
establishing the Divine worship after the manner of Christ. For this
reason also a bishop is especially called the bridegroom of the
Church even as Christ is.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the episcopate is an Order?

Objection 1: It would seem that the episcopate is an Order. First of
all, because Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v) assigns these three orders to
the ecclesiastical hierarchy, the bishop, the priest, and the minister.
In the text also (Sent. iv, D, 24) it is stated that the episcopal Order is
fourfold.
Objection 2: Further, Order is nothing else but a degree of power in
the dispensing of spiritual things. Now bishops can dispense certain
sacraments which priests cannot dispense, namely Confirmation
and Order. Therefore the episcopate is an Order.
Objection 3: Further, in the Church there is no spiritual power other
than of Order or jurisdiction. But things pertaining to the episcopal
power are not matters of jurisdiction, else they might be committed
to one who is not a bishop, which is false. Therefore they belong to
the power of Order. Therefore the bishop has an Order which a
simple priest has not; and thus the episcopate is an Order.
On the contrary, One Order does not depend on a preceding order as
regards the validity of the sacrament. But the episcopal power
depends on the priestly power, since no one can receive the
episcopal power unless he have previously the priestly power.
Therefore the episcopate is not an Order.
Further, the greater Orders are not conferred except on Saturdays
[The four Ember Saturdays]. But the episcopal power is bestowed on
Sundays [Dist. lxxv, can. Ordinationes]. Therefore it is not an Order.
I answer that, Order may be understood in two ways. In one way as a
sacrament, and thus, as already stated (Question 37, Articles 2,4),
every Order is directed to the sacrament of the Eucharist. Wherefore
since the bishop has not a higher power than the priest, in this
respect the episcopate is not an Order. In another way Order may be
considered as an office in relation to certain sacred actions: and
thus since in hierarchical actions a bishop has in relation to the
mystical body a higher power than the priest, the episcopate is an
Order. It is in this sense that the authorities quoted speak.
Hence the Reply to the First Objection is clear.