Lord. "The mercy of man is toward his neighbor, but the mercy of the Lord is
upon all flesh." [Sirach 18:13] How "upon all flesh"? Whether you mean sinners,
or just men, we all need the mercy of God; we all enjoy it, be it Paul, be it Peter,
or be it John. And listen to their own words; there is no need of mine. For what
says this blessed one? "But I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly." [1
Timothy 1:13] What then, was there afterwards no need of mercy? Hear what he
says; "But I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me." [1 Corinthians 15:10] And of Epaphroditus he says,
"For indeed he was sick, near unto death; but God had mercy on him; and not
on him only, but on me also, that I might not have sorrow upon sorrow."
[Philippians 2:27] And again he says, "We were weighed down exceedingly,
beyond our power, insomuch that we despaired even of life. Yea, we ourselves
have had the answer of death within ourselves, that we should not trust in
ourselves, but in God, who delivered us out of so great a death, and will deliver."
[2 Corinthians 1:8-10] And again, "And I was delivered out of the mouth of the
lion; and the Lord will deliver me." [2 Timothy 4:17-18] And everywhere we
shall find him glorying in this, that by mercy he was saved. Peter, too, became so
great, because mercy was shown him. For hear Christ saying to him, "Satan has
desired to sift you as wheat; and I made supplication for you, that your faith fail
not." [Luke 22:31-32] John, too, became so great through mercy, and in short all
of them. For listen to Christ when He says, "You did not choose Me, but I chose
you." [John 15:16] For we all have need of the mercy of God, as it is written,
"The mercy of God is upon all flesh." But if these men needed the mercy of God,
what should one say of the rest? For why, tell me, does He "make the sun to rise
on the evil and the good"? Did He withhold the rain for one year, would He not
destroy all? And what if He caused overwhelming rain? What if He rained down
fire? What if He sent flies? But what do I say? If He were so to do as He once
did, would not all perish? If He were to shake the earth, would not all perish? It
is now seasonable to say, "What is man, that You are mindful of him?" [Psalm
8:4] Were He only to threaten the earth, all men would become one tomb. "As a

drop of water from the bucket," it is written, "so are the nations in His sight, they
shall be counted as very small dust, as the turning of the balance." [Isaiah 40:15]
It were as easy for Him to destroy all things, and to make them again, as for us to
turn the balance. He then who has such power over us, and sees us sinning every
day, and yet punishes us not, how is it but by mercy He bears with us? Since
beasts too exist by mercy: "You, Lord, wilt preserve both men and beasts."
[Psalm 36:7] He looked upon the earth, and filled it with living things. And
wherefore? For your sake! And wherefore did He make you? Through His
goodness.
There is nothing better than oil. It is the cause of light, and there also it is
the cause of light. "Then shall your light break forth as the morning" [Isaiah
58:8], says the Prophet, if you show pity upon your neighbour. And as natural oil
contains light, so then does mercy [alms] grant us a great, a marvelous light.
Much mention does Paul, too, make of this mercy. In one place, hear him say,
"Only that we should remember the poor." [Galatians 2:10] And in another, "If it
be meet for me to go also." [1 Corinthians 16:4] And in every place, turn where
you will, you see him anxious about this very thing. And again, "And let our
people also learn to maintain good works." [Titus 3:14] And again, "These
things are good and profitable unto men." [Titus 3:8] Listen to a certain other
one who says, "Alms do deliver from death" [Tobit 12:9]; If You take away pity,
"Lord, Lord, who shall stand" [Psalm 130:3]; and it is said, If You enter "into
judgment with your servant" [Psalm 143:2]; "A great thing is man"; why? "and
an honorable thing is a merciful man." [Proverbs 20:6, Septuagint] For this is
the true character of man, to be merciful, yea rather the character of God, to
show mercy. Do you see, how strong is the mercy of God? This made all things,
this formed the world, this made the angels, it was through mere goodness. For
this cause, too, He threatened hell, that we may attain unto the kingdom, and
through mercy we do attain unto the kingdom. For wherefore did God, being
alone, create so many beings? Was it not through goodness? Was it not through
love to men? If you ask why such and such things are, you will always find your