perversity of these men. He shows that even these (the Jews) need observe no
more (than these necessary things). And if we do not write to them, it is not that
they are bound to observe anything more, but only that they have one to tell
them. And he does not say, Not to offend, nor to turn them back, which is what
Paul said to the Galatians, but, "not to trouble them:" he shows that the point
([κατόρθωμα]) if carried is nothing but a mere troubling. Thus he made an end
of the whole matter; and while he seems to preserve the Law by adopting these
rules from it, he unbinds it by taking only these. (c) There was a design of
Providence in the disputation also, that after the disputation the doctrine might
be more firm. "Then pleased it the Apostles to send chosen men of their own
company," etc., no ordinary persons, but the "leading men; having written"
(letters) "by them after this manner. To those in Antioch," it says, "and Syria and
Cilicia." (v. 22, 23) where the disease had its birth. Observe how they say
nothing harsher ([φορτικώτερον]) against those men, but look to one thing only,
namely, to undo (the mischief) which has been done. For this would make even
the movers of the faction there to confess (that they were wrong). They do not
say, The seducers, the pestilent fellows, or suchlike: though where need is, Paul
does this, as when he says, "O full of all guile" [Acts 13:10]: but here, the point
being carried, there was no need. And observe, they do not put it, That certain
from us ordered you to keep the Law, but, "Troubled you with words, subverting
your souls,"— nothing could be more proper ([κυριώτερον]) than that word:
none (of the other speakers) has so spoken of the things done by those men. "The
souls," he says, already strongly established, these persons are [ἀ]
[νασχευάζοντες] as in speaking of a building, "taking them down again:"
displacing them ([μετατιθέντες]) from the foundation). "To whom," he says, "we
gave no such commandment. It seemed good therefore to us being assembled
with one accord, to send chosen men unto you together with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul, men that have hazarded their lives for the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ." (v. 25, 26.) If "beloved," they will not despise them, if they "have
hazarded their lives," they have themselves a right to be believed. "We have

sent," it says, "Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by word
of mouth." [Acts 15:27] For it was necessary that there should be not merely the
Epistle there by itself, lest they should say that Paul and Barnabas had
suppressed (the real purport), that they said one thing instead of another. The
encomium passed upon Paul stopped their mouths. For this is the reason why
neither Paul comes alone nor Barnabas (with him), but others also from the
Church; that he may not be suspected, seeing it was he that advocated that
doctrine: nor yet those from Jerusalem alone. It shows that they have a right to
be believed. "For it seemed good," say they, "to the Holy Ghost and to us" [Acts
15:28]: not making themselves equal (to Him )— they are not so mad. But why
does it put this (so)? Why did they add, "And to us," and yet it had sufficed to
say, "To the Holy Ghost?" The one, "To the Holy Ghost," that they may not deem
it to be of man; the other, "To us," that they may be taught that they also
themselves admit (the Gentiles), although themselves being in circumcision.
They have to speak to men who are still weak and afraid of them: this is the
reason why this also is added. And it shows that it is not by way of
condescension that they speak, neither because they spared them, nor as
considering them weak, but the contrary; for great was the reverence of the
teachers also. "To lay upon you no greater burden"— they are ever calling it a
burden— and again, "save these necessary things:" for that was a superfluous
burden. See here a brief Epistle, with nothing more in it (than was needed),
neither arts of persuasion ([κατασκευὰς]) nor reasonings, but simply a command:
for it was the Spirit's legislating. "So when they were dismissed they came to
Antioch, and having gathered the multitude together, they delivered to them the
epistle." [Acts 15:30] After the epistle, then (Judas and Silas) also themselves
exhort them by word [Acts 15:31]: for this also was needful, that (Paul and
Barnabas) might be quit of all suspicion. "Being prophets also themselves," it
says, exhorted the brethren "with many words." It shows here the right that Paul
and Barnabas have to be believed. For Paul also might have done this, but it
behooved to be done by these. And after they had tarried there a space, they