produced the overthrow, but the folly of the builders? For there was rain there,
and there was rain here; there were floods there, and there were floods here; here
the beating of winds, and there again the same. The one man built a house, and
the other built a house. The building was the same; the trials were the same; but
the end was not the same; because there was not the same foundation. For the
folly of the builder, not the nature of the trials, caused the fall of the building;
otherwise the house that was founded upon the rock should have fallen, whereas
nothing of that kind befell it. But do not suppose that these things were spoken
merely of a house; for the discourse relates to a soul, giving proof by its works
that it hears the divine word, or rejects it. Thus Job built up his soul. The rain
descended—for the fire fell from heaven and devoured all his flocks; the floods
came—the frequent—the constant—the successive messengers of his calamities,
telling him of the destruction of his herds— of his camels— of his children. The
winds blew—the bitter words of his wife:— "Curse God," she said, "and die."
[Job 2:9] Yet the house fell not: the soul was not supplanted: the just man did not
blaspheme; but even gave thanks thus, saying, "The Lord gave and the Lord has
taken away. As it pleased the Lord, so is it come to pass." [Job 1:21] Do you see
that not the nature of the trials, but the negligence of the indolent, is wont to
cause the overthrow? Since tribulation makes the strong man stronger. Who says
this? It is the man who lived in tribulation, the blessed Paul; he speaks thus:
"Tribulation works patience, and patience probation, and probation hope."
[Romans 5:3-4] And even as the violence of the wind, when it rushes upon
strong trees, and sways them in all directions, does not root them up, but renders
them still firmer and stronger by these attacks; so the soul that is holy, and lives
in a religious state, is not supplanted by the inroads of trial and tribulation, but
stimulated thereby to more patience; even as the blessed Job, whom they made
more illustrious and honourable.
5. At the present time then, a man is angry with us, a man of like passions,
and of like soul, and we are afraid: but in the case of Job it was an evil and
malignant demon who was angry; nay, he was not simply angry, but set in

motion all sorts of machinations, and brought forward every stratagem; and yet
even with all he could not conquer the fortitude of the just man. But here is a
man, who is at one time angry, at another time is reconciled; and we are
nevertheless dead with fear. On that occasion it was a devil that waged war, who
is never reconciled to human nature, but has engaged in a war without treaty, and
a battle without truce against our race; yet nevertheless, the just man laughed his
darts to scorn. What apology then, or what pardon can be ours, if we cannot
sustain a human trial; we who are taught such spiritual wisdom under grace;
when this man before grace, and before the Old Testament, endured this most
grievous war so nobly! These things, beloved, we should therefore always
discourse of with one another; and by words of this kind encourage ourselves.
For you are witnesses, and your conscience is a witness how much gain we have
already received from this trial! The dissolute man has now become sober; the
bold man meek; the slothful man active. They who never at any time saw a
church, but constantly spent their time at the theatre, now remain in the church
the whole day long. Tell me then, do you grieve on this account, that God has
made you earnest through fear; that He has led you by tribulation to a sense of
your own safety? But is your conscience pained? Yea, is your mind pierced
every day as with a dart, expecting death, and the greatest wrath? Nevertheless,
from thence too we shall gain a great advance toward virtue, if our piety is made
more earnest by means of the distress. For God is able to free you from all these
evils this day. But not until He sees that you are purified; not until He sees that a
conversion has taken place, and a repentance firm and unshaken, will He entirely
remove the tribulation. The goldsmith, until he perceives the gold well refined,
will not draw it out from the furnace; and even so God will not take away this
cloud before He has thoroughly amended us. For He Himself who has permitted
this trial, knows the time for removing it. So it is also with one who plays the
harp; he neither overstrains the string, lest he break it, nor relaxes it too much,
lest he mar the consonance of its harmony. Thus does God act. He neither places
our souls in a state of constant repose, nor of lengthened tribulation; making use