worse than acknowledged murderers. For on this account, it is not merely said
they had a robber; but one noted, that is, who was infamous in wickedness, who
had perpetrated countless murders. But nevertheless even him did they prefer to
the Saviour of the world, and neither did they reverence the season because it
was holy, nor the laws of humanity, nor any other thing of the kind, but envy had
once for all blinded them. And besides their own wickedness, they corrupt the
people also, that for deceiving them too they might suffer the most extreme
punishment.
Since therefore they ask for the other, he says, "What shall I do then with
the Christ," in this way desiring to put them to the blush, by giving them the
power to choose, that at least out of shame they might ask for Him, and the
whole should be of their bountifulness. For though to say, He had not done
wrong, made them more contentious, yet to require that He should be saved out
of humanity, carries with it persuasion and entreaty that cannot be gainsaid.
But even then they said, "Crucify Him. But he said, why, what evil has He
done? But they cried out exceedingly, let Him be crucified. But he, when he saw
that he profited nothing, washed his hands, saying, I am innocent." Why then did
you deliver Him up? Why did you not rescue Him, as the centurion did Paul.
[Acts xxi] For that man too was aware that he would please the Jews; and a
sedition had taken place on his account, and a tumult, nevertheless he stood firm
against all. But not so this man, but he was extremely unmanly and weak, and all
were corrupt together. For neither did this man stand firm against the multitude,
nor the multitude against the Jews, and in every way their excuse was taken
away. For they "cried out exceedingly," that is, cried out the more, "Let Him be
crucified." For they desired not only to put Him to death, but also that it should
be on a charge of wickedness, and though the judge was contradicting them, they
continued to cry out the same thing.
Do you see how many things Christ did in order to recover them? For like
as He often times checked Judas, so likewise did He restrain these men too, both
throughout all His Gospel, and at the very time of His condemnation. For surely

when they saw the ruler and the judge washing his hands of it, and saying, "I am
innocent of this blood," they should have been moved to compunction both by
what was said, and by what was done, as well when they saw Judas had hanged
himself, as when they saw Pilate himself entreating them to take another in the
place of Him. For when the accuser and traitor condemns himself, and he who
gives sentence puts off from himself the guilt, and such a vision appears the very
night, and even as condemned he begs Him off, what kind of plea will they
have? For if they were not willing that He should be innocent, yet they should
not have preferred to him even a robber, one that was acknowledged to be such,
and very notorious.
What then did they? When they saw the judge washing his hands, and
saying, "I am innocent," they cried out "His blood be on us, and on our
children." [Matthew 27:25] Then at length when they had given sentence against
themselves, he yielded that all should be done.
See here too their great madness. For passion and wicked desire are like
this. They suffer not men to see anything of what is right. For be it that you curse
yourselves; why do you draw down the curse upon your children also?
Nevertheless, the lover of man, though they acted with so much madness,
both against themselves, and against their children, so far from confirming their
sentence upon their children, confirmed it not even on them, but from the one
and from the other received those that repented, and counts them worthy of good
things beyond number. For indeed even Paul was of them, and the thousands that
believed in Jerusalem; for, "you see it is said, brother, how many thousands of
Jews there are which believe." And if some continued in their sin, to themselves
let them impute their punishment.
"Then released he Barabbas unto them, but Jesus, when he had scourged
Him, he delivered to be crucified."
And wherefore did he scourge Him. Either as one condemned, or willing to
invest the judgment with due form, or to please them. And yet he ought to have
resisted them. For indeed even before this he had said, "Take ye Him, and judge