yet so far only, as not to take away free will. For the unbeliever might perhaps
say, If everything is of God, and we contribute nothing of ourselves, while He
turns us, as if we were mere wood and stone, from wickedness to the love of
wisdom, why then did He make Paul such as he was, and not Judas? To remove
this objection, mark the prudence of his expression, "Which was committed," he
says, "to my trust." This was his own excellence and merit, but not wholly his
own; for he says, "I thank Christ Jesus, who enabled me." This is God's part:
then his own again, "Because He counted me faithful." Surely because he would
be serviceable of his own part.
Ver. 13. "Putting me into his service, who was before a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and injurious; but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in
unbelief."
Thus we see him acknowledge both his own part and that of God, and while
he ascribes the greater part to the providence of God, he extenuates his own, yet
so far only, as we said before, as was consistent with free will. And what is this,
"Who enabled me"? I will tell you. He had so heavy a burden to sustain, that he
needed much aid from above. For think what it was to be exposed to daily
insults, and mockeries, and snares, and dangers, scoffs, and reproaches, and
deaths; and not to faint, or slip, or turn backward, but though assaulted every day
with darts innumerable, to bear up manfully, and remain firm and imperturbable.
This was the effect of no human power, and yet not of Divine influence alone,
but of his own resolution also. For that Christ chose him with a foreknowledge
of what he would be, is plain from the testimony He bore to him before the
commencement of his preaching. "He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my
name before the Gentiles and kings." [Acts 9:15] For as those who bear the royal
standard in war require both strength and address, that they may not let it fall
into the hands of the enemy; so those who sustain the name of Christ, not only in
war but in peace, need a mighty strength, to preserve it uninjured from the
attacks of accusers. Great indeed is the strength required to bear the name of
Christ, and to sustain it well, and bear the Cross. For he who in action, or word,

or thought, does anything unworthy of Christ, does not sustain His name, and
has not Christ dwelling in him. For he that sustains that name bears it in triumph,
not in the concourse of men, but through the very heavens, while all angels stand
in awe, and attend upon him, and admire him.
"I thank the Lord, who has enabled me." Observe how he thanks God even
for that which was his own part. For he acknowledges it as a favor from Him
that he was "a chosen vessel." For this, O blessed Paul, was your own part. "For
God is no respecter of persons." But I thank Him that he "thought me worthy of
this ministry." For this is a proof that He esteemed me faithful. The steward in a
house is not only thankful to his master that he is trusted, but considers it as a
sign that he holds him more faithful than others: so it is here. Then observe how
he magnifies the mercy and loving-kindness of God, in describing his former
life, "who was formerly," he says, "a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and
injurious." And when he speaks of the still unbelieving Jews, he rather
extenuates their guilt. "For I bear them record that they have a zeal for God, but
not according to knowledge." [Romans 10:2] But of himself he says, "Who was a
blasphemer and a persecutor." Observe his lowering of himself! So free was he
from self-love, so full of humility, that he is not satisfied to call himself a
persecutor and a blasphemer, but he aggravates his guilt, showing that it did not
stop with himself, that it was not enough that he Gas a blasphemer, but in the
madness of his blasphemy he persecuted those who were willing to be godly.
"But I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly in unbelief."
Why then did other Jews not obtain mercy? Because what they did, they did
not ignorantly, but willfully, well knowing what they did. For this we have the
testimony of the Evangelist. "Many of the Jews believed on Him, but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess Him. For they loved the praise of men more
than the praise of God." [John 12:42-43] And Christ again said to them, "How
can you believe, who receive honor one of another" [John 5:44]? And the parents
of the blind man "said these things for fear of the Jews, lest they should be put
out of the synagogue." [John 9:22] Nay the Jews themselves said, "Perceive how