THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord enjoined on the apostles, whose
place is taken by the bishops, both duties, namely, of teaching and
of baptizing, but in different ways. Because Christ committed to them
the duty of teaching, that they might exercise it themselves as being
the most important duty of all: wherefore the apostles themselves
said (Acts 6:2): "It is not reason that we should leave the word of
God and serve tables." On the other hand, He entrusted the apostles
with the office of baptizing, to be exercised vicariously; wherefore
the Apostle says (1 Cor. 1:17): "Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel." And the reason for this was that the merit and
wisdom of the minister have no bearing on the baptismal effect, as
they have in teaching, as may be seen from what we have stated
above (Question 64, Article 1, ad 2; Articles 5,9). A proof of this is
found also in the fact that our Lord Himself did not baptize, but His
disciples, as John relates (4:2). Nor does it follow from this that
bishops cannot baptize; since what a lower power can do, that can
also a higher power. Wherefore also the Apostle says (1 Cor. 1:14,16)
that he had baptized some.
Reply to Objection 2: In every commonwealth minor affairs are
entrusted to lower officials, while greater affairs are restricted to
higher officials; according to Ex. 18:22: "When any great matter
soever shall fall out, let them refer it to thee, and let them judge the
lesser matters only." Consequently it belongs to the lower officials of
the state to decide matters concerning the lower orders; while to the
highest it belongs to set in order those matters that regard the
higher orders of the state. Now by Baptism a man attains only to the
lowest rank among the Christian people: and consequently it
belongs to the lesser officials of the Church
to baptize, namely, the priests, who hold the place of the seventy-two
disciples of Christ, as the gloss says in the passage quoted from
Luke 10.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 65, Article 3), the
sacrament of Baptism holds the first place in the order of necessity;
but in the order of perfection there are other greater sacraments
which are reserved to bishops.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.3.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a layman can baptize?

Objection 1: It seems that a layman cannot baptize. Because, as
stated above (Article 2), to baptize belongs properly to the priestly
order. But those things which belong to an order cannot be
entrusted to one that is not ordained. Therefore it seems that a
layman, who has no orders, cannot baptize.
Objection 2: Further, it is a greater thing to baptize, than to perform
the other sacramental rites of Baptism, such as to catechize, to
exorcize, and to bless the baptismal water. But these things cannot
be done by laymen, but only by priests. Therefore it seems that
much less can laymen baptize.
Objection 3: Further, just as Baptism is a necessary sacrament, so is
Penance. But a layman cannot absolve in the tribunal of Penance.
Neither, therefore, can he baptize.
On the contrary, Pope Gelasius I and Isidore say that "it is often
permissible for Christian laymen to baptize, in cases of urgent
necessity."
I answer that, It is due to the mercy of Him "Who will have all men to
be saved" (1 Tim. 2:4) that in those things which are necessary for
salvation, man can easily find the remedy. Now the most necessary
among all the sacraments is Baptism, which is man's regeneration
unto spiritual life: since for children there is no substitute, while
adults cannot otherwise than by Baptism receive a full remission
both of guilt and of its punishment. Consequently, lest man should
have to go without so necessary a remedy, it was ordained, both that
the matter of Baptism should be something common that is easily
obtainable by all, i.e. water; and that the minister of Baptism should
be anyone, even not in orders, lest from lack of being baptized, man
should suffer loss of his salvation.
Reply to Objection 1: To baptize belongs to the priestly order by
reason of a certain appropriateness and solemnity; but this is not
essential to the sacrament. Consequently, if a layman were to
baptize even outside a case of urgency; he would sin, yet he would
confer the sacrament; nor would the person thus baptized have to be
baptized again.