of the intellect, by which knowledge is here acquired, are performed
by the mind turning to the phantasms in the aforesaid sensitive
powers. Hence through such acts the passive intellect acquires a
certain facility in considering the species received: and the aforesaid
sensitive powers acquire a certain aptitude in seconding the action
of the intellect when it turns to them to consider the intelligible
object. But as the intellectual act resides chiefly and formally in the
intellect itself, whilst it resides materially and dispositively in the
inferior powers, the same distinction is to be applied to habit.
Knowledge, therefore, acquired in the present life does not remain in
the separated soul, as regards what belongs to the sensitive powers;
but as regards what belongs to the intellect itself, it must remain;
because, as the Philosopher says (De Long. et Brev. Vitae ii), a form
may be corrupted in two ways; first, directly, when corrupted by its
contrary, as heat, by cold; and secondly, indirectly, when its subject
is corrupted. Now it is evident that human knowledge is not
corrupted through corruption of the subject, for the intellect is an
incorruptible faculty, as above stated (Question 79, Article 2, ad 2).
Neither can the intelligible species in the passive intellect be
corrupted by their contrary; for there is no contrary to intelligible
"intentions," above all as regards simple intelligence of "what a thing
is." But contrariety may exist in the intellect as regards mental
composition and division, or also reasoning; so far as what is false
in statement or argument is contrary to truth. And thus knowledge
may be corrupted by its contrary when a false argument seduces
anyone from the knowledge of truth. For this reason the Philosopher
in the above work mentions two ways in which knowledge is
corrupted directly: namely, "forgetfulness" on the part of the
memorative power, and "deception" on the part of a false argument.
But these have no place in the separated soul. Therefore we must
conclude that the habit of knowledge, so far as it is in the intellect,
remains in the separated soul.
Reply to Objection 1: The Apostle is not speaking of knowledge as a
habit, but as to the act of knowing; and hence he says, in proof of
the assertion quoted, "Now, I know in part."
Reply to Objection 2: As a less good man may exceed a better man
in bodily stature, so the same kind of man may have a habit of
knowledge in the future life which a better man may not have. Such
knowledge, however, cannot be compared with the other
prerogatives enjoyed by the better man.

Reply to Objection 3: These two kinds of knowledge are not of the
same species, so there is no impossibility.
Reply to Objection 4: This objection considers the corruption of
knowledge on the part of the sensitive powers.