see a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him;"
[Proverbs 26:12] and, "Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight!" [Isaiah 5:21] and Paul himself in another place, "Be
not wise in your own conceits." [Romans 12:16] Surely one who had been thus
taught, and had thus admonished others, would not fall into such an error, even
were he an ordinary man; much less then Paul himself. Nevertheless, as I said,
this expression nakedly considered may easily prove a snare and offense to many
hearers. But if the cause of it is subjoined, all will applaud and admire the
speaker. This then let us do; for it is not the right course to weigh the mere
words, nor examine the language by itself, as many errors will be the
consequence, but to attend to the intention of the writer. And unless we pursue
this method in our own discourses, and examine into the mind of the speaker, we
shall make many enemies, and every thing will be thrown into disorder. Nor is
this confined to words, but the same result will follow, if this rule is not observed
in actions. For surgeons often cut and break certain of the bones; so do robbers;
yet it would be miserable indeed not to be able to distinguish one from the other.
Again, homicides and martyrs, when tortured, suffer the same pangs, yet is the
difference between them great. Unless we attend to this rule, we shall not be able
to discriminate in these matters; but shall call Elijah and Samuel and Phineas
homicides, and Abraham a son-slayer; that is, if we go about to scrutinize the
bare facts, without taking into account the intention of the agents. Let us then
inquire into the intention of Paul in thus writing, let us consider his scope, and
general deportment towards the Apostles, that we may arrive at his present
meaning. Neither formerly, nor in this case, did he speak with a view of
disparaging the Apostles or of extolling himself, (how so? When he included
himself under his anathema?) but always in order to guard the integrity of the
Gospel. Since the troublers of the Church said that they ought to obey the
Apostles who suffered these observances, and not Paul who forbade them, and
hence the Judaizing heresy had gradually crept in, it was necessary for him
manfully to resist them, from a desire of repressing the arrogance of those who

improperly exalted themselves, and not of speaking ill of the Apostles. And
therefore he says, "I conferred not with flesh and blood;" for it would have been
extremely absurd for one who had been taught by God, afterwards to refer
himself to men. For it is right that he who learns from men should in turn take
men as his counsellors. But he to whom that divine and blessed voice had been
vouchsafed, and who had been fully instructed by Him that possesses all the
treasures of wisdom, wherefore should he afterwards confer with men? It were
meet that he should teach, not be taught by them. Therefore he thus spoke, not
arrogantly, but to exhibit the dignity of his own commission. "Neither went I
up," says he, "to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me." Because
they were continually repeating that the Apostles were before him, and were
called before him, he says, "I went not up to them." Had it been needful for him
to communicate with them, He, who revealed to him his commission, would
have given him this injunction. Is it true, however, that he did not go up there?
nay, he went up, and not merely so, but in order to learn somewhat of them.
When a question arose on our present subject in the city of Antioch, in the
Church which had from the beginning shown so much zeal, and it was discussed
whether the Gentile believers ought to be circumcised, or were under no
necessity to undergo the rite, this very Paul himself and Silas went up. How is it
then that he says, I went not up, nor conferred? First, because he went not up of
his own accord, but was sent by others; next, because he came not to learn, but
to bring others over. For he was from the first of that opinion, which the
Apostles subsequently ratified, that circumcision was unnecessary. But when
these persons deemed him unworthy of credit and applied to those at Jerusalem
he went up not to be farther instructed, but to convince the gain-sayers that those
at Jerusalem agreed with him. Thus he perceived from the first the fitting line of
conduct, and needed no teacher, but, primarily and before any discussion,
maintained without wavering what the Apostles, after much discussion, [Acts
15:2-7] subsequently ratified. This Luke shows by his own account, that Paul
argued much at length with them on this subject before he went to Jerusalem.