SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.162, C.2.

Reply to Objection 4: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xi, 30),
"the woman had not believed the serpent's statement that they were
debarred by God from a good and useful thing, were her mind not
already filled with the love of her own power, and a certain proud selfpresumption." This does not mean that pride preceded the
promptings of the serpent, but that as soon as the serpent had
spoken his words of persuasion, her mind was puffed up, the result
being that she believed the demon to have spoken truly.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.162, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the first man's pride consisted in his

coveting God's likeness?
Objection 1: It would seem that the first man's pride did not consist
in his coveting the Divine likeness. For no one sins by coveting that
which is competent to him according to his nature. Now God's
likeness is competent to man according to his nature: for it is written
(Gn. 1:26): "Let us make man to our image and likeness." Therefore
he did not sin by coveting God's likeness.
Objection 2: Further, it would seem that man coveted God's likeness
in order that he might obtain knowledge of good and evil: for this
was the serpent's suggestion: "You shall be as Gods knowing good
and evil." Now the desire of knowledge is natural to man, according
to the saying of the Philosopher at the beginning of his Metaphysics
i, 1: "All men naturally desire knowledge." Therefore he did not sin
by coveting God's likeness.
Objection 3: Further, no wise man chooses the impossible. Now the
first man was endowed with wisdom, according to Ecclus. 17:5, "He
filled them with the knowledge of understanding." Since then every
sin consists in a deliberate act of the appetite, namely choice, it
would seem that the first man did not sin by coveting something
impossible. But it is impossible for man to be like God, according to
the saying of Ex. 15:11, "Who is like to Thee among the strong, O
Lord?" Therefore the first man did not sin by coveting God's
likeness.
On the contrary, Augustine commenting on Ps. 68:5 [Enarr. in Ps.
68], "Then did I restore that which I took not away," says: "Adam and
Eve wished to rob the Godhead and they lost happiness."
I answer that, likeness is twofold. One is a likeness of absolute
equality [FP, Question 93, Article 1]: and such a likeness to God our
first parents did not covet, since such a likeness to God is not
conceivable to the mind, especially of a wise man.
The other is a likeness of imitation, such as is possible for a creature
in reference to God, in so far as the creature participates somewhat
of God's likeness according to its measure. For Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. ix): "The same things are like and unlike to God; like,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.162, C.3.