liberty; for slavery consists in lording over others and employing
them for one's own profit. Such subjection is not required in Order,
whereby those who preside have to seek the salvation of their
subjects and not their own profit.
Reply to Objection 2: Each one should esteem himself lower in merit,
not in office; and orders are a kind of office.
Reply to Objection 3: Order among the angels does not arise from
difference of nature, unless accidentally, in so far as difference of
grace results in them from difference of nature. But in them it results
directly from their difference in grace; because their orders regard
their participation of divine things, and their communicating them in
the state of glory, which is according to the measure of grace, as
being the end and effect, so to speak, of grace. on the other hand,
the Orders of the Church militant regard the participation in the
sacraments and the communication thereof, which are the cause of
grace and, in a way, precede grace; and consequently our Orders do
not require sanctifying grace, but only the power to dispense the
sacraments; for which reason order does not correspond to the
difference of sanctifying grace, but to the difference of power.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Order is properly defined?

Objection 1: It would seem that order is improperly defined by the
Master (Sent. iv, D, 53), where it is said "Order is a seal of the
Church, whereby spiritual power is conferred on the person
ordained." For a part should not be described as the genus of the
whole. Now the character which is denoted by the seal in a
subsequent definition is a part of order, since it is placed in
contradistinction with that which is either reality only, or sacrament
only, since it is both reality and sacrament. Therefore seal should
not be mentioned as the genus of Order.
Objection 2: Further, just as a character is imprinted in the
sacrament of order, so is it in the sacrament of Baptism. Now
character was not mentioned in the definition of Baptism. Therefore
neither should it be mentioned in the definition of Order.
Objection 3: Further, in Baptism there is also given a certain spiritual
power to approach the sacraments; and again it is a seal, since it is a
sacrament. Therefore this definition is applicable to Baptism; and
consequently it is improperly applied to Order.
Objection 4: Further, Order is a kind of relation, and relation is
realized in both its terms. Now the terms of the relation of order are
the superior and the inferior. Therefore inferiors have order as well
as superiors. Yet there is no power of preeminence in them, such as
is mentioned here in the definition of Order, as appears from the
subsequent explanation (Sent. iv, D, 53), where promotion to power
is mentioned. Therefore Order is improperly defined there.
I answer that, The Master's definition of Order applies to Order as a
sacrament of the Church. Hence he mentions two things, namely the
outward sign, a "kind of seal," i.e. a kind of sign, and the inward
effect, "whereby spiritual power," etc.
Reply to Objection 1: Seal stands here, not for the inward character,
but for the outward action, which is the sign and cause of inward
power; and this is also the sense of character in the other definition.
If, however, it be taken for the inward character, the definition would
not be unsuitable; because the division of a sacrament into those
three things is not a division into integral parts, properly speaking;