FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.4.

In like manner with regard to hostile relations with foreigners, the
Law contained suitable precepts. For, in the first place, it
commanded that war should be declared for a just cause: thus it is
commanded (Dt. 20:10) that when they advanced to besiege a city,
they should at first make an offer of peace. Secondly, it enjoined that
when once they had entered on a war they should undauntedly
persevere in it, putting their trust in God. And in order that they
might be the more heedful of this command, it ordered that on the
approach of battle the priest should hearten them by promising them
God's aid. Thirdly, it prescribed the removal of whatever might prove
an obstacle to the fight, and that certain men, who might be in the
way, should be sent home. Fourthly, it enjoined that they should use
moderation in pursuing the advantage of victory, by sparing women
and children, and by not cutting down fruit-trees of that country.
Reply to Objection 1: The Law excluded the men of no nation from
the worship of God and from things pertaining to the welfare of the
soul: for it is written (Ex. 12:48): "If any stranger be willing to dwell
among you, and to keep the Phase of the Lord; all his males shall
first be circumcised, and then shall he celebrate it according to the
manner, and he shall be as that which is born in the land." But in
temporal matters concerning the public life of the people, admission
was not granted to everyone at once, for the reason given above: but
to some, i.e. the Egyptians and Idumeans, in the third generation;
while others were excluded in perpetuity, in detestation of their past
offense, i.e. the peoples of Moab, Ammon, and Amalec. For just as
one man is punished for a sin committed by him, in order that others
seeing this may be deterred and refrain from sinning; so too may
one nation or city be punished for a crime, that others may refrain
from similar crimes.
Nevertheless it was possible by dispensation for a man to be
admitted to citizenship on account of some act of virtue: thus it is
related (Judith 14:6) that Achior, the captain of the children of
Ammon, "was joined to the people of Israel, with all the succession
of his kindred." The same applies to Ruth the Moabite who was "a
virtuous woman" (Ruth 3:11): although it may be said that this
prohibition regarded men and not women, who are not competent to
be citizens absolutely speaking.
Reply to Objection 2: As the Philosopher says (Polit. iii, 3), a man is
said to be a citizen in two ways: first, simply; secondly, in a
restricted sense. A man is a citizen simply if he has all the rights of

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.4.

citizenship, for instance, the right of debating or voting in the
popular assembly. On the other hand, any man may be called citizen,
only in a restricted sense, if he dwells within the state, even common
people or children or old men, who are not fit to enjoy power in
matters pertaining to the common weal. For this reason bastards, by
reason of their base origin, were excluded from the "ecclesia," i.e.
from the popular assembly, down to the tenth generation. The same
applies to eunuchs, who were not competent to receive the honor
due to a father, especially among the Jews, where the divine worship
was continued through carnal generation: for even among the
heathens, those who had many children were marked with special
honor, as the Philosopher remarks (Polit. ii, 6). Nevertheless, in
matters pertaining to the grace of God, eunuchs were not
discriminated from others, as neither were strangers, as already
stated: for it is written (Iss 56:3): "Let not the son of the stranger that
adhereth to the Lord speak, saying: The Lord will divide and
separate me from His people. And let not the eunuch say: Behold I
am a dry tree."
Reply to Objection 3: It was not the intention of the Law to sanction
the acceptance of usury from strangers, but only to tolerate it on
account of the proneness of the Jews to avarice; and in order to
promote an amicable feeling towards those out of whom they made a
profit.
Reply to Objection 4: A distinction was observed with regard to
hostile cities. For some of them were far distant, and were not
among those which had been promised to them. When they had
taken these cities, they killed all the men who had fought against
God's people; whereas the women and children were spared. But in
the neighboring cities which had been promised to them, all were
ordered to be slain, on account of their former crimes, to punish
which God sent the Israelites as executor of Divine justice: for it is
written (Dt. 9:5) "because they have done wickedly, they are
destroyed at thy coming in." The fruit-trees were commanded to be
left untouched, for the use of the people themselves, to whom the
city with its territory was destined to be subjected.
Reply to Objection 5: The builder of a new house, the planter of a
vineyard, the newly married husband, were excluded from fighting,
for two reasons. First, because man is wont to give all his affection
to those things which he has lately acquired, or is on the point of
having, and consequently he is apt to dread the loss of these above