On account of what they had received from Achamoth.

do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God." For instance, they make no scruple about
eating meats offered in sacrifice to idols, imagining that they can in this way contract no defilement.
Then, again, at every heathen festival celebrated in honour of the idols, these men are the first to
assemble; and to such a pitch do they go, that some of them do not even keep away from that bloody
spectacle hateful both to God and men, in which gladiators either fight with wild beasts, or singly
encounter one another. Others of them yield themselves up to the lusts of the flesh with the utmost
greediness, maintaining that carnal things should be allowed to the carnal nature, while spiritual
things are provided for the spiritual. Some of them, moreover, are in the habit of defiling those
women to whom they have taught the above doctrine, as has frequently been confessed by those
women who have been led astray by certain of them, on their returning to the Church of God, and
acknowledging this along with the rest of their errors. Others of them, too, openly and without a
blush, having become passionately attached to certain women, seduce them away from their
husbands, and contract marriages of their own with them. Others of them, again, who pretend at
first to live in all modesty with them as with sisters, have in course of time been revealed in their
true colours, when the sister has been found with child by her [pretended] brother.
4. And committing many other abominations and impieties, they run us down (who from the
fear of God guard against sinning even in thought or word) as utterly contemptible and ignorant
persons, while they highly exalt themselves, and claim to be perfect, and the elect seed. For they
declare that we simply receive grace for use, wherefore also it will again be taken away from us;
but that they themselves have grace as their own special possession, which has descended from
above by means of an unspeakable and indescribable conjunction; and on this account more will
be given them. They maintain, therefore, that in every way it is always necessary for them to
practise the mystery of conjunction. And that they may persuade the thoughtless to believe this,
they are in the habit of using these very words, "Whosoever being in this world does not so love a
woman as to obtain possession of her, is not of the truth, nor shall attain to the truth. But whosoever
being of this world has intercourse with woman, shall not attain to the truth, because he has so
acted under the power of concupiscence." On this account, they tell us that it is necessary for us
whom they call animal men, and describe as being of the world, to practise continence and good
works, that by this means we may attain at length to the intermediate habitation, but that to them
who are called "the spiritual and perfect" such a course of conduct is not at all necessary. For it is
not conduct of any kind which leads into the Pleroma, but the seed sent forth thence in a feeble,
immature state, and here brought to perfection.