Canaan," it was after that long attendance and importunity of hers, [Matthew
15:22] that He finally granted the healing of her daughter, even though of His
mercy He healed her. Hereby then we learn that even though we are to receive
mercy, we must first make ourselves worthy of the mercy; for though there be
mercy, yet it seeks out those that are worthy. It will not come upon all without
distinction; those even who have no feeling; for He says, "I will have mercy on
whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion."
[Romans 9:15] Observe at least what he says here, "You also helping together by
prayer." He has neither ascribed the whole of the good work to them lest he
should lift them up, nor yet deprived them of all share whatever in it, in order to
encourage them and animate their zeal, and bring them together one to another.
Whence also he said, "He also granted to you my safety." For ofttimes also God
is abashed by a multitude praying with one mind and mouth. Whence also He
said to the prophet, "And shall not I spare this city wherein dwell more than six
score thousand persons?" [Jonah 4:11] Then lest you think He respects the
multitude only, He says, "Though the number of Israel be as the sand of the sea,
a remnant shall be saved." [Isaiah 10:22] How then saved He the Ninevites?
Because in their case, there was not only a multitude, but a multitude and virtue
too. For each one "turned from" his "evil way." [Jonah 3:10; 4:11] And besides,
when He saved them, He said that they discerned not "between their right hand
and their left hand:" whence it is plain that even before, they sinned more out of
simpleness than of wickedness: it is plain too from their being converted, as they
were, by hearing a few words. But if their being six score thousand were of itself
enough to save them, what hindered even before this that they should be saved?
And why says He not to the Prophet, And shall I not spare this city which so
turns itself? But brings forward the score thousands. He produces this also as a
reason over and above. For that they had turned was known to the prophet, but
he knew not either their numbers or their simpleness. So by every possible
consideration he is desirous to soften them. For even greatness of number has
power, when there is virtue withal. And truly the Scripture elsewhere also shows

this plainly, where it says, "But prayer was made earnestly of the Church unto
God for him:" [Acts 12:5] and so great power had it, even when the doors were
shut and chains lay on him and keepers were sleeping by on either side, that it
led the Apostle forth and delivered him from them all. But as where there is
virtue, greatness of number has mighty power; so where wickedness is, it profits
nothing. For the Israelites of whom He says that the number of them was as the
sand of the sea, perished every one, and those too in the days of Noe were both
many, yea, numberless; and yet this profited them nothing. For greatness of
number has no power of itself, but only as an adjunct.
6. Let us then be diligent in coming together in supplication; and let us pray
for one another, as they did for the Apostles. For [so] we both fulfil a
commandment, and are "anointed " unto love: (and when I say love, I speak of
every good thing:) and also learn to give thanks with more earnestness: for they
that give thanks for the things of others, much more will they for their own. This
also was David wont to do, saying, "Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt
His name together;" [Psalm 34:3] this the Apostle too does every where require.
This let us too labor in; and let us show forth unto all the beneficence of God
that we may get companions in the act of praise: for if when we have received
any good from men, by proclaiming it forth we make them the readier to serve
us: much more shall we, by telling abroad the benefits of God, draw Him on to
more good-will. And if when we have received benefits of men we stir up others
also to join us in the giving of thanks, much more ought we to bring many unto
God who may give thanks for us. For if Paul who had so great confidence
[toward God] does this, much more is it necessary for us to do it. Let us then
exhort the saints to give thanks for us; and let us do the same ourselves for one
another. To priests especially this good work belongs, since it is an exceeding
privilege. For drawing near, we first give thanks for the whole world and the
good things common [to all]. For even though the blessings of God be common,
yet does the common preservation include your own; so that thou both owest
common thanksgivings for your own peculiar blessing, and for the common