Ver. 18. "Wherefore we would fain have come unto you."
Which is the part of love; yet here he mentions no other necessity but "that
we might see you." "I Paul once and again, and Satan hindered us."
What do you say? Does Satan hinder? Yes, truly, for this was not the work
of God. For in the Epistle to the Romans, he says this, that God hindered him
[from Romans 15:22]; and elsewhere Luke says, that "the Spirit" hindered them
from going into Asia. [Acts 16:7] And in the Epistle to the Corinthians he says,
that it is the work of the Spirit, but here only of Satan. But what hindrance of
Satan is he speaking of? Some unexpected and violent temptations: for a plot, it
says, being formed against him by the Jews, he was detained three months in
Greece. But it is another thing to remain for the sake of the dispensation, and
willingly. For there he says, "Wherefore having no more place in these parts"
[Romans 15:23], and, "To spare you I forbare to come unto Corinth." [2
Corinthians 1:23] But here nothing of this sort. But what? That "Satan hindered"
him. "Even I Paul," he says, "both once and again." Observe, how ambitious he
is, and what a display he makes, in his willingness to show that he loved them
most of all. "I Paul," he says, instead of Although no others. For they indeed
were only willing, but I even attempted it.
Ver. 19. "For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of glorying? Are not even
ye before our Lord Jesus at His coming?"
Are the Macedonians, tell me, your hope, O blessed Paul? Not these alone,
he says. Therefore he has added, "Are you not also?" For "what," he says, "is our
hope, or joy, or crown of glorying"? Observe then the words, which are those of
women, inflamed with tenderness, talking to their little children. "And crown of
glorying," he says. For the name of "crown" was not sufficient to express the
splendor, but also "of glorying." Of what fiery warmth is this! Never could either
mother, or father, yea if they even met together, and commingled their love, have
shown their own affection to be equivalent to that of Paul. "My joy and crown,"
he says, that is, I rejoice in you more than in a crown. For consider how great a
thing it is, that an entire Church should be present, planted and rooted by Paul.

Who would not rejoice in such a multitude of children, and in the goodness of
those children? So that this also is not flattery. For he has not said "ye," but "ye
also" together with the others.
Ver. 20. "For you are our glory and our joy."
Chap. 3:1, 2. "Wherefore, when we could no longer forbear, we thought it
good to be left behind at Athens alone." Instead of saying, "we chose." "And sent
Timothy, our brother and God's minister and our fellow-worker in the Gospel of
Christ."
And this he says, not as extolling Timothy, but honoring them, that he sent
them the fellow-worker, and minister of the Gospel. As if he had said, Having
withdrawn him from his labors we have sent to you the minister of God, and our
fellow-laborer in the Gospel of Christ.
"To establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith."
Ver. 3. "That no man be moved by these afflictions."
What then does he say here? Because the temptations of the teachers
trouble their disciples, and he had then fallen into many temptations, as also he
himself says, that "Satan hindered us," always saying this; "both once," he says,
"and again I would have come to you," and was not able, which was a proof of
great violence. And it was reasonable that this should trouble them, for they are
not so much troubled at their own temptations, as at those of their teachers; as
neither is the soldier so much troubled at his own trials, as when he sees his
general wounded. "To establish you," he says; not that they were at all deficient
in faith, nor that they required to learn anything.
"And to comfort you concerning your faith; that no man be moved by these
afflictions; for yourselves know that hereunto we are appointed."
Ver. 4. "For verily, when we were with you, we told you beforehand that we
are to suffer affliction; even as it came to pass, and you know."
You ought not, he says, to be troubled, for nothing strange, nothing contrary
to expectation is happening; which was sufficient to raise them up. For do you
see that on this account also Christ foretold to His disciples? For hear Him