not that even after the cross, and after He had been received up, He sent the
apostles unto the Jews that had slain Him, to bring them His ten thousand
blessings, and this, though they were to suffer ten thousand terrors at their
hands?
6. But have you been greatly wronged? Nay, what have you endured like
your Lord, bound, beaten with whips, with rods, spit upon by servants, enduring
death, and that death, which is of all deaths the most shameful, after ten
thousand favors shown? And even if you have been greatly wronged, for this
very cause most of all do thou do him good, that you may both make your own
crown more glorious, and set your brother free from the worst infirmity. For so
too the physicians, when they are kicked, and shamefully handled by the insane,
then most of all pity them, and take measures for their perfect cure, knowing that
the insult comes of the extremity of their disease. Now I bid you too have the
same mind touching them that are plotting against you, and do thou so treat them
that are injuring you. For it is they above all that are diseased, it is they who are
undergoing all the violence. Deliver him then from this grievous contumely, and
grant him to let go his anger, and set him free from that grievous demon, wrath.
Yea, for if we see persons possessed by devils, we weep for them; we do not
seek to be ourselves also possessed.
Now let us do this too likewise with respect to them that are angry; for in
truth the enraged are like the possessed; yea rather, are more wretched than they,
being mad with consciousness of it. Wherefore also their frenzy is without
excuse. Trample not then on the fallen, but rather pity him. For so, should we see
any one troubled with bile, blinded and giddy, and straining to cast up this evil
humor, we stretch forth a hand, and continue to support him through his
struggles, and though we stain our garments, we regard it not, but seek one thing
only, how we may set him free from this grievous distress. This then let us do
with respect to the angry also, and continue to bear them up when vomiting and
struggling; nor let him go, until he put from him all the bitterness. And then shall
he feel toward you the greatest thankfulness; when he is at rest, then he will

know clearly from how great trouble you have released him.
But why do I speak of the thanks from him? For God will straightway
crown you, and will requite you with ten thousand honors, because you have
freed your brother from a grievous disease; and that brother too will honor you
as a master, ever reverencing your forbearance.
Do you see not the women that are in travail, how they bite those that stand
by, and they are not pained? Or rather they are pained, but bear it bravely, and
sympathize with them who are in sorrow and are torn by those pangs. These do
thou too emulate, and prove not softer than women. For after these women have
brought forth (for these men are more feeble minded than women), then they
will know you to be a man in comparison. of Heaven?
9. What then can we deserve, who are commanded to emulate God, and are
perhaps in a way not so much as to equal the publicans? For if "to love them that
love us" be the part of publicans, sinners, and heathens: when we do not even
this (and we do it not, so long as we envy our brethren who are in honor), what
penalty shall we not incur, commanded as we are to surpass the scribes, and
taking our place below the heathens? How then shall we behold the kingdom, I
pray you? How shall we set foot on that holy threshold, who are not surpassing
even the publicans? For this He covertly signified, when He said, "Do not even
the publicans the same?"
And this thing most especially we may admire in His teaching, that while in
each instance He sets down with very great fullness the prizes of the conflicts;
such as "to see God," and "to inherit the kingdom of Heaven," and "to become
sons of God," and "like God," and "to obtain mercy," and "to be comforted," and
"the great reward:" if anywhere He must needs mention things grievous, He
does this in a subdued tone. Thus in the first place, the name of hell He has set
down once only in so many sentences; and in some other instances too, it is with
reserve that He corrects the hearer, and as though he were managing His
discourse rather in the way of shaming than threatening him; where He says, "do
not even the publicans the same?" and, "if the salt have lost its savor;" and, "he