([ἐ] [ντρεπτικὥς]), addressed them in the words, "Why, are you come out as
against a thief with swords and staves?" [Matthew 26:55] And having cast them
down backwards [John 18:6], as they continued insensible, He of His own
accord gave Himself up next, and forbore while He saw them putting manacles
upon His holy hands, while He had the power at once to confound all things, and
overthrow them. But do you even after this deal fiercely with the poor? And
even were he guilty of ten thousand sins, want and famine were enough to soften
down a soul ever so blunted. But you stand brutalized, and imitating the rage of
lions. Yet they never taste of dead bodies. But you, while you see him a very
corpse ([τεταριχευμένον] lit. salter, or, a mummy) for distresses, yet leapest upon
him now that he is down, and tearest his body by your insults, and gatherest
storm after storm, and makest him as he is fleeing to the haven for refuge to split
upon a rock, and bringest a shipwreck about more distressing than those in the
sea. And how will you say to God, Have mercy upon me, and ask of Him
remission of sins, when you are insolent to one who has done no sin, and callest
him to account for this hunger and great necessity, and throwest all the brute
beasts into the shade by your cruelty. For they indeed by the compulsion of their
belly lay hold of the food needful for them. But you, when nothing either thrusts
you on or compels you, devourest your brother, bitest, and tearest him, if not
with your teeth, yet with words that bite more cuttingly. How then will you
receive the sacred Host ([προσφορὰν]), when you have empurpled your tongue
in human gore? How give the kiss of peace, with mouth gorged with war? Nay,
how enjoy every common nourishment, when you are gathering so much
venom? Thou dost not relieve the poverty, why make it even more grinding?
thou dost not lift up him that is fallen, why throw him down also? thou dost not
remove despondency, why even increase it? You give no money, why use
insulting words besides? Have you not heard what punishment they suffer that
feed not the poor? To what vengeance they are condemned? For He says,
"Depart to the fire prepared for the devil and his angels." [Matthew 25:41] If
then they that feed not are so condemned, what punishment are they to suffer,

who besides not feeding, even insult? What punishment shall they undergo?
What hell? That we kindle not so great evils against ourselves, whiles we have it
in our power, let us correct this evil complaint also, and put a bridle on the
tongue. And let us be so far from insulting, as even to invite them, both by words
and actions, that by laying up much mercy for ourselves, we may obtain the
blessings promised us. Which God grant that we may all attain unto by the grace
and love towards man, etc.