THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.5.

come. And He hath subjected all things under His feet." Therefore
Christ is not only the Head of men, but of angels. Hence we read (Mt.
4:11) that "angels came and ministered to Him."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ's influence over men is chiefly with
regard to their souls; wherein men agree with angels in generic
nature, though not in specific nature. By reason of this agreement
Christ can be said to be the Head of the angels, although the
agreement falls short as regards the body.
Reply to Objection 2: The Church, on earth, is the congregation of
the faithful; but, in heaven, it is the congregation of comprehensors.
Now Christ was not merely a wayfarer, but a comprehensor. And
therefore He is the Head not merely of the faithful, but of
comprehensors, as having grace and glory most fully.
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine here uses the similitude of cause
and effect, i.e. inasmuch as corporeal things act on bodies, and
spiritual things on spiritual things. Nevertheless, the humanity of
Christ, by virtue of the spiritual nature, i.e. the Divine, can cause
something not only in the spirits of men, but also in the spirits of
angels, on account of its most close conjunction with God, i.e. by
personal union.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the grace of Christ, as Head of the

Church, is the same as His habitual grace, inasmuch as He is
Man?
Objection 1: It would seem that the grace whereby Christ is Head of
the Church and the individual grace of the Man are not the same. For
the Apostle says (Rm. 5:15): "If by the offense of one many died,
much more the grace of God and the gift, by the grace of one man,
Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many." But the actual sin of Adam
is distinct from original sin which he transmitted to his posterity.
Hence the personal grace which is proper to Christ is distinct from
His grace, inasmuch as He is the Head of the Church, which flows to
others from Him.
Objection 2: Further, habits are distinguished by acts. But the
personal grace of Christ is ordained to one act, viz. the sanctification
of His soul; and the capital grace is ordained to another, viz. to
sanctifying others. Therefore the personal grace of Christ is distinct
from His grace as He is the Head of the Church.
Objection 3: Further, as was said above (Question 6, Article 6), in
Christ we distinguish a threefold grace, viz. the grace of union,
capital grace, and the individual grace of the Man. Now the individual
grace of Christ is distinct from the grace of union. Therefore it is also
distinct from the capital grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 1:16): "Of His fulness we all have
received." Now He is our Head, inasmuch as we receive from Him.
Therefore He is our Head, inasmuch as He has the fulness of grace.
Now He had the fulness of grace, inasmuch as personal grace was in
Him in its perfection, as was said above (Question 7, Article 9).
Hence His capital and personal grace are not distinct.
I answer that, Since everything acts inasmuch as it is a being in act,
it must be the same act whereby it is in act and whereby it acts, as it
is the same heat whereby fire is hot and whereby it heats. Yet not
every act whereby anything is in act suffices for its being the
principle of acting upon others. For since the agent is nobler than
the patient, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 16) and the
Philosopher (De Anima iii, 19), the agent must act on others by
reason of a certain pre-eminence. Now it was said above (Article 1;