expounded it by order unto them, saying, I was in the city of Joppa, praying:" he
does not say why, nor on what occasion: "and in a trance I saw a vision, a
certain vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by
four corners; and it came even to me (v. 4, 5): upon the which when I had
fastened my eyes, I considered, and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. And I heard a voice saying unto
me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat." (v. 6, 7.) As much as to say, This of itself was
enough to have persuaded me— my having seen the linen sheet: but moreover a
Voice was added. "But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing common or unclean has
at any time entered into my mouth." [Acts 11:8] Do you mark? "I did my part,"
says he: "I said, that I have never eaten anything common or unclean:" with
reference to this that they said, "You went in, and ate with them." But this he
does not say to Cornelius: for there was no need to mention it to him. "But the
voice answered me again from heaven, What God has cleansed, that call not
thou common. And this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into
heaven." (v. 9, 10.) The essential points were those (that ensued at Cæsarea); but
by these he prepares the way for them. Observe how he justifies himself (by
reasons), and forbears to use his authority as teacher. For the more mildly he
expresses himself, the more tractable he makes them. "At no time," says he, "has
anything common or unclean entered into my mouth.— And, behold— this too
was part of his defence— three men stood at the house in which I was, sent to me
from Cæsarea. And the Spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting." (v. 11,
12.) Do you mark that it is to the Spirit the enacting of laws belongs! "And these
also accompanied me"— nothing can be more lowly, when he alleges the
brethren for witnesses!— "these six men, and we entered into the man's house:
and he showed us how he had seen an angel in his house, which stood and said
unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose surname is Peter; who
shall tell you words, whereby thou and all your house shall be saved." (v. 13,
14.) And he does not mention the words spoken by the Angel to Cornelius, Your
prayers and your alms have come up for a memorial before God, that he may not

disgust them; but what says he? "He shall tell you words, whereby thou and all
your house shall be saved:" with good reason this is added. Also he says nothing
of the man's fitness ([ἐ] [πιεικές]). "The Spirit," he might say, "having sent (me),
God having commanded, on the one part having summoned (me) through the
Angel, on the other urging (me) on, and solving my doubt about the things, what
was I to do?" He says none of these things, however: but makes his strong point
of what happened last, which even in itself was an incontrovertible argument.
"And as I began to speak," etc. [Acts 11:15] Then why did not this happen
alone? Of superabundance ([ἐ] [κ περιουσίας]) this is wrought by God, that it
might be shown that the beginning too was not from the Apostle. But had he set
out of his own motion, without any of these things having taken place, they
would have been very much hurt: so that from the beginning he disposes their
minds in his favor*: saying to them, "Who have received the Holy Ghost even as
we." And not content with this, he reminds them also of the words of the Lord:
"Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed
baptized with water; but you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost." [Acts
11:16] He means, that no new thing has happened, but just what the Lord
foretold. "But there was no need to baptize?" (Comp. p. 158.) But the baptism
was completed already. And he does not say, I ordered them to be baptized: but
what says he? "Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as He did unto us,
who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God?"
[Acts 11:17] He shows that he had himself done nothing: for the very thing
which we have obtained, he says, that same did those men receive. That he may
more effectually stop their mouths, therefore he says, "The like gift." Do you
perceive how he does not allow them to have less: when they believed, says he,
the same gift did God give unto them, as He did to us who believed on the Lord,
and Himself cleanses them. And he does not say, To you, but to us. Why do you
feel aggrieved, when we call them partakers (with us?) "When they heard these
things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to
the Gentiles granted repentance unto life." [Acts 11:18] Do you mark that it all