He threatened to overthrow the city of the Ninevites [Jonah 1:2] for the very
reason that He might not overthrow it. For if He wished to publish our sins He
would not announce beforehand that He would publish them: but as it is He does
make this announcement in order that being sobered by the fear of exposure, if
not also by the fear of punishment we may purge ourselves from them all. This
also is what takes place in the case of baptism: for He conducts the man to the
pool of water without disclosing his sins to any one; yet He publicly presents the
boon and makes it manifest to all, while the sins of the man are known to no one
save God Himself and him who receives the forgiveness of them. This also was
what took place in the case of this paralytic, He makes the reproof without the
presence of witnesses, or rather the utterance is not merely a reproof but also a
justification; He justifies Himself as it were for evil-entreating him so long,
telling him and proving to him that it was not without cause and purpose that He
had suffered him to be so long afflicted, for He reminded him of his sins, and
declared the cause of his infirmity. "For having found him," we read, "in the
temple, He said unto him, sin no more lest some worse thing happen unto you."
And now since we have derived so much profit from the account of the
former paralytic let us turn to the other who is presented to us in St. Matthew's
Gospel. For in the case of mines where any one happens to find a piece of gold
he makes a further excavation again in the same place: and I know that many of
those who read without care imagine that one and the same paralytic is presented
by the four evangelists: but it is not so. Therefore you must be on the alert, and
pay careful attention to the matter. For the question is not concerned with
ordinary matters, and this discourse when it has received its proper solution will
be serviceable against both Greeks and Jews and many of the heretics. For thus
all find fault with the evangelists as being at strife and variance: yet this is not
the fact, Heaven forbid! But although the outward appearance is different, the
grace of the Spirit which works upon the soul of each is one, and where the
grace of the Spirit is, there is love, joy, and peace; and there war and disputation,
strife and contention are not. How then shall we make it clear that this paralytic

is not the same as the other, but a different man? By many tokens, both of place
and time, and season, and day, and from the manner of the cure, and the coming
of the physician and the loneliness of the man who was healed. And what of
this? Some one will say: for have not many of the evangelists given diverse
accounts of other signs? Yes, but it is one thing to make statements which are
diverse, and another, statements which are contradictory; for the former causes
no discord or strife: but that which is now presented to us is a strong case of
contradiction unless it be proved that the paralytic at the pool was a different
man from him who is described by the other three evangelists. Now that you
may understand what is the difference between statements which are diverse and
contradictory, one of the evangelists has stated that Christ carried the cross,
[John 19:17] another that Simon the Cyrenian carried it: but this causes no
contradiction or strife. "And how," you say, "is there no contradiction between
the statements that he carried and did not carry?" Because both took place.
When they went out of the Prætorium Christ was carrying it: but as they
proceeded Simon took it from Him and bore it. Again in the case of the robbers,
one says that the two blasphemed: another that one of them checked him who
was reviling the Lord. [Luke 23:40] Yet in this again there is no contradiction:
because here also both things took place, and at the beginning both the men
behaved ill: but afterwards when signs occurred, when the earth shook and the
rocks were rent, and the sun was darkened, one of them was converted, and
became more chastened, and recognized the crucified one and acknowledged his
kingdom. For to prevent your supposing that this took place by some
constraining force of one impelling him from within, and to remove your
perplexity, he exhibits the man to you on the cross while he is still retaining his
former wickedness in order that you may perceive that his conversion was
effected from within and out of his own heart assisted by the grace of God and
so he became a better man.
4. And it is possible to collect many other instances of this kind from the
Gospels, which seem to have a suspicion of contradiction, where there is no real