persons, or whatever else, blessed are you:" so He speaks. What could be newer
than these injunctions? Wherein the very things which all others avoid, these He
declares to be desirable; I mean, being poor, mourning, persecution, evil report.
But yet He both affirmed this, and convinced not two, nor ten, nor twenty, nor an
hundred, nor a thousand men, but the whole world. And hearing things so
grievous and galling, so contrary to the accustomed ways of men, the multitudes
"were astonished." So great was the power of Him who spoke.
However, lest you should think that the mere fact of being evil spoken of
makes men blessed, He has set two limitations; when it is for His sake, and when
the things that are said are false: for without these, he who is evil spoken of, so
far from being blessed, is miserable.
Then see the prize again: "Because your reward is great in heaven." But
you, though you hear not of a kingdom given in each one of the blessings, be not
discouraged. For although He give different names to the rewards, yet He brings
all into His kingdom. Thus, both when He says, "they that mourn shall be
comforted;" and, "they that show mercy shall obtain mercy;" and, "the pure in
heart shall see God;" and, the peacemakers "shall be called the children of
God;" nothing else but the Kingdom does He shadow out by all these sayings.
For such as enjoy these, shall surely attain unto that. Think not therefore that this
reward is for the poor in spirit only, but for those also who hunger after
righteousness, for the meek, and for all the rest without exception.
Since on this account He has set His blessing on them all, that you might
not look for anything sensible: for that man cannot be blessed, who is crowned
with such things as come to an end with this present life, and hurry by quicker
than a shadow.
8. But when He had said, "your reward is great," he added also another
consolation, saying, "For so persecuted they the prophets which were before
you."
Thus, since that first, the promise of the Kingdom, was yet to come, and all
in expectation, He affords them comfort from this world; from their fellowship

with those who before them had been ill-treated.
For "think not," says He, "that for something inconsistent in your sayings
and enactments ye suffer these things: or, as being teachers of evil doctrines, you
are to be persecuted by them; the plots and dangers proceed not of any
wickedness in your sayings, but of the malice of those who hear you. Wherefore
neither are they any blame to you who suffer wrong, but to them who do the
wrong. And to the truth of these things all preceding time bears witness. For
against the prophets they did not even bring any charge of transgressing the law,
and of sentiments of impiety, that they stoned some, chased away others,
encompassed others with innumerable afflictions. Wherefore let not this trouble
you, for of the very same mind they do all that is done now." Do you see how He
raised up their spirits, by placing them near to the company of Moses and Elias?
Thus also Paul writing to the Thessalonians, says, "For you became
followers of the Churches of God, which are in Judea; for you also have suffered
the same things of your own fellow-countrymen, even as they have of the Jews:
who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have driven us out;
and they please not God, and are contrary to all men." [1 Thessalonians 2:1415] Which same point here also Christ has established.
And whereas in the other beatitudes, He said, "Blessed are the poor," and
"the merciful;" here He has not put it generally, but addresses His speech unto
themselves, saying, "Blessed are you, when they shall revile you, and persecute
you, and say every evil word:" signifying that this is a special privilege of theirs;
and that beyond all others, teachers have this for their own.
At the same time He here also covertly signifies His own dignity, and His
equality in honor with Him who begot Him. For "as they on the Father's
account," says He, "so shall you also for me suffer these things." But when He
says, "the prophets which were before you," He implies that they were also by
this time become prophets.
Next, declaring that this above all profits them, and makes them glorious,
He did not say, "they will calumniate and persecute you, but I will prevent it."