reason he mentioned his trials and afflictions, in that he has added, "You,
therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus." What do you
say? You have shaken us with terrors, you have told us that you are in chains, in
afflictions, that all have forsaken you, and, as if you had said you had not
suffered anything, nor been abandoned by any, you add. "Thou therefore, my son,
be strong"?— And justly too. For these things were to your strengthening more
than to his. For if I, Paul, endure these things, much more ought thou to bear
them. If the master, much more the disciple. And this exhortation he introduces
with much affection, calling him "son," and not only so, but "my son." If you are
a son, he means, imitate your father. If you are a son, be strong in consideration
of the things which I have said, or rather be strong, not merely from what I have
told you, but "of God." "Be strong," he says, "in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus"; that is, "through the grace of Christ." That is, stand firmly. You know the
battle. For elsewhere he says, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood."
[Ephesians 6:12] And this he says not to depress but to excite them. Be sober
therefore, he means, and watch, have the grace of the Lord coöperating with you,
and aiding you in your contest, contribute your own part with much alacrity and
resolution. "And the things that you have heard of me among many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men"; to "faithful" men, not to questioners nor to
reasoners, to "faithful." How faithful? Such as betray not the Gospel they should
preach. "The things which you have heard," not which you have searched out.
For "faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." [Romans 10:17]
But wherefore, "among many witnesses"? As if he had said: You have not heard
in secret, nor apart, but in the presence of many, with all openness of speech. Nor
does he say, Tell, but "commit," as a treasure committed is deposited in safety.
Again he alarms his disciple, both from things above and things below. But he
says not only "commit to faithful men"; for of what advantage is it that one is
faithful, if he is not able to convey his doctrine to others? When he does not
indeed betray the faith; but does not render others faithful? The teacher therefore
ought to have two qualities, to be both faithful, and apt to teach; wherefore he

says, "who shall be able to teach others also."
"Thou therefore endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ." Oh,
how great a dignity is this, to be a soldier of Jesus Christ! Observe the kings on
earth, how great an honor it is esteemed to serve under them. If therefore the
soldier of the king ought to endure hardness, not to endure hardness is not the
part of any soldier. So that it behooves you not to complain, if you endure
hardness, for that is the part of a soldier; but to complain, if you dost not endure
hardness.
"No man that wars entangles himself with the affairs of this life, that he may
please him who has chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for
masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive lawfully."
These things are said indeed to Timothy, but through him they are
addressed to every teacher and disciple. Let no one therefore of those who hold
the office of a Bishop disdain to hear these things, but let him be ashamed not to
do them. "If any one strive for masteries," he says, "he is not crowned, except he
strive lawfully." What is meant by "lawfully"? It is not enough that he enters into
the lists, that he is anointed, and even engages, unless he comply with all the
laws of the exercise, with respect to diet, to temperance and sobriety, and all the
rules of the wrestling school, unless, in short, he go through all that is befitting
for a wrestler, he is not crowned. And observe the wisdom of Paul. He mentions
wrestlers and soldiers, the one to prepare him for slaughter and blood, the other
with reference to endurance, that he might bear everything with fortitude, and be
ever in exercise.
"The husbandman that labors must be first partaker of the fruits."
He had first spoken from his own example as a teacher. He now speaks
from those that are more common, as wrestlers and soldiers, and in their case he
sets before him the rewards. First, that he may please him who has chosen him to
be a soldier; secondly, that he may be crowned; now he proposes a third example
that more particularly suits himself. For the instance of the soldier and the
wrestler corresponds to those who are under rule, but that of the husbandman to