which has been spoken of, we should say, "O Lord, how have You magnified
Your works; in wisdom have You made them all."
6. But what is the sapient argument of the unbelievers, when we go over all
these particulars with them; the magnitude, the beauty of the creation, the
prodigality, the munificence everywhere displayed? This very thing, say they, is
the worst fault, that God has made the world so beautiful and so vast. For if He
had not made it beautiful and vast, we should not have made a god of it; but now
being struck with its grandeur, and marvelling at its beauty, we have thought it to
be a deity. But such an argument is good for nothing. For that neither the
magnitude, nor beauty of the world is the cause of this impiety, but their own
want of understanding, is what we are prepared to show, proved by the case of
ourselves, who have never been so affected. Why then have "we" not made a
deity of it? Do we not see it with the same eyes as themselves? Do we not enjoy
the same advantage from the creation with themselves? Do we not possess the
same soul? Have we not the same body? Do we not tread the same earth? How
comes it that this beauty and magnitude has not persuaded us to think the same
as they do? But this will be evident not from this proof only, but from another
besides. For as a proof that it is not for its beauty they have made a deity of it,
but by reason of their own folly, why do they adore the ape, the crocodile, the
dog, and the vilest of animals? Truly, "they became vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools." [Romans 1:21-22]
7. Nevertheless, we will not frame our answer from these things only, but
will also say something yet further. For God, foreseeing these things of old,
destroyed, in His wisdom, this plea of theirs. On this account He made the world
not only wonderful and vast, but also corruptible and perishable; and placed
therein many evidences of its weakness; and what He did with respect to the
Apostles, He did with respect to the whole world. What then did He with respect
to the Apostles? Since they used to perform many great and astonishing signs
and wonders, He suffered them constantly to be scourged, to be expelled, to

inhabit the dungeon, to encounter bodily infirmities, to be in continual
tribulations, lest the greatness of their miracles should make them to be
accounted as gods among mankind. Therefore when He had bestowed so great
favour upon them, He suffered their bodies to be mortal, and in many cases
obnoxious to disease; and did not remove their infirmity, that He might give full
proof of their nature. And this is not merely my assertion, but that of Paul
himself, who says, "For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; but
now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which he sees me to
be, or that he hears of me." [2 Corinthians 12:6] And again, "But we have this
treasure in earthen vessels." [2 Corinthians 4:7] But what is meant by "earthen
vessels?" In this body, he means, which is mortal and perishable. For just as the
earthen vessel is formed from clay and fire, so also the body of these saints being
clay, and receiving the energy of the spiritual fire, becomes an earthen vessel.
But for what reason was it thus constituted, and so great a treasure, and such a
plentitude of graces entrusted to a mortal and corruptible body? "That the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us." For when you see the
Apostles raising the dead, yet themselves sick, and unable to remove their own
infirmities, you may clearly perceive, that the resurrection of the dead man was
not effected by the power of him who raised him, but by the energy of the Spirit.
For in proof, that they were frequently sick, hear what Paul says respecting
Timothy, "Use a little wine for your stomach's sake, and your frequent
infirmities." And again, of another he says, "But Trophimus I have left at Miletus
sick." [2 Timothy 4:20] And writing to the Philippians, he said, "Epaphroditus
was sick near unto death." [Philippians 2:25] For if, when this was the case, they
accounted them to be gods, and prepared to do sacrifice unto them, saying, "The
gods have come down to us in the likeness of men;" [Acts 14:11] had such
infirmities not existed, to what extent of impiety might not men have proceeded,
when they beheld their miracles? As then in this case, because of the greatness
of these signs, He suffered their nature to remain in a state of infirmity, and
permitted those repeated trials, in order that they might not be thought to be