Saul had promised, if David should slay the Philistine, to take him for his son-in
law, and to give him his daughter with great favor. He slew the Philistine; the
other broke his engagements, and so far from bestowing her, did even go about
to slay him. Which then became the more glorious? Was not the one choking
with despair and the evil demon, while the other shone brighter than the sun with
his trophies, and his loyalty to God? Again, before the choir of the women, was
not the one suffocated with envy, while the other enduring all in silence, won all
men, and bound them unto himself? And when he had even gotten him into his
hands, and spared him, which again was happy? And which wretched? Which
was the weaker? Which the more powerful? Was it not this man, who did not
avenge himself even justly? And very naturally. For the one had armed soldiers,
but the other, righteousness, that is more mighty than ten thousand armies, for
his ally and helper. And for this reason, though unjustly conspired against, he
endured not to slay him even justly. For he knew by what had taken place before,
that not to do evil, but to suffer evil, this is what makes men more powerful. So
it is with bodies also, so also with trees.
And what did Jacob? Was he not injured by Laban, and suffered evil?
Which then was the stronger? He that had gotten the other into his hands, and
dared not touch him, but was afraid and trembling; [Genesis 31:29] or he whom
we see without arms and soldiers proving more terrible to him than innumerable
kings?
But that I may give you another demonstration of what I have said, greater
than this, let us again in the instance of David himself try the reasoning on the
opposite side. For this man who being injured was so strong, afterwards upon
committing an injury became on the contrary the weaker party. At least, when he
had wronged Uriah, his position was changed again, and the weakness passed to
the wrong doer, and the might to the injured; for he being dead laid waste the
other's house. And the one being a king, and alive, could do nothing, but the
other, being but a soldier, and slain, turned upside down all that pertained to his
adversary.

Would ye that in another way also I should make what I say plainer? Let us
look into their case, who avenge themselves even justly. For as to the wrong
doers, that they are the most worthless of all men, warring against their own
soul; this is surely plain to every one.
But who avenged himself justly, yet kindled innumerable ills, and pierced
himself through with many calamities and sorrows? The captain of David's host.
For he both stirred up a grievous war, and suffered unnumbered evils; not one
whereof would have happened, had he but known how to command himself.
Let us flee therefore from this sin, and neither in words nor deeds do our
neighbors wrong. For He said not, If you slander, and summon a court of justice,
but simply, If you speak evil, though within yourself, even so shall you suffer the
utmost punishment. Though it be true which you have said, though thou have
spoken upon conviction, even so shall vengeance come upon you. For not
according to what the other has done, but according to what you have spoken,
will God pass sentence; "for by your words you shall be condemned," says He.
Are you not told that the Pharisee also spoke the truth, and affirmed what was
manifest to all men, without discovering what was hidden? Nevertheless, he paid
the utmost penalty.
But if we ought not to accuse men of things which are acknowledged, much
less of those which are disputed; nay, for the offender has a judge. Do not now, I
warn you, seize upon the privilege of the Only Begotten. For Him is the throne
of judgment reserved.
3. Would you however be a judge? You have a court of judgment which has
great profit, and bears no blame. Make consideration, as judge, to sit down upon
your conscience, and bring before it all your transgressions, search out the sins
of your soul, and exact with strictness the account thereof, and say, "wherefore
did you dare to do this and that?" And if she shun these, and be searching into
other men's matters, say to her, "Not about these am I judging you, not for these
are you come here to plead. For what, if such a one be a wicked man? Thou, why
did you commit this and that offense? Answer for yourself, not to accuse; look to