pleasure; what further source of tribulation shall we have? On this account we
should call no man happy, save him only who lives according to God. These
only the Scripture terms blessed. For "blessed," it is said, "is the man who has
not walked in the counsel of the ungodly. Blessed is he whom You chasten, and
teachest him out of Your law. Blessed are the undefiled in the way. Blessed are
all they who trust in Him. Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord. Blessed
is he whom his soul condemns not. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord." And
again, Christ speaks thus: "Blessed are they that mourn; blessed are the humble;
blessed are the meek; blessed are the peacemakers; blessed are they who are
persecuted for righteousness' sake." [Matthew 5:3-10] Do you see how the
divine laws everywhere pronounce blessed none of the rich, or of the well-born,
or of the possessors of glory, but the man who has gotten hold of virtue. For
what is required of us is, that in every thing we do or suffer, the fear of God
should be the foundation; and if you implant this as the root, not merely will
ease, and honour, and glory, and attention, produce fruits that shall be
pleasurable to you; but hostilities also, and calumnies, and contempt, and
disgrace, and torments, and all things without exception. And just as the roots of
trees are bitter in themselves, and yet produce our sweetest fruits, so, verily,
godly sorrow will bring us an abundant pleasure. They know, who have often
prayed with anguish, and shed tears, what gladness they have reaped; how they
purged the conscience; how they rose up with favourable hopes! For as I am
always saying, it is not the nature of the things, but our disposition, which is
wont to make us sad or joyful. If then we can render the latter such as it ought to
be, we shall have a pledge for all gladness. And just as, with the body, it is not so
much the nature of the air, or the things it meets from without, as its own internal
condition, that either injures or assists it, so also it is in the case of the soul; and
much more so; for in the one case, there is the necessity of nature; in the other,
the whole is seated in the power of choice. Therefore Paul, when he had endured
innumerable evils— shipwrecks, wars, persecutions, plots, the assaults of
robbers, and things too numerous to be recounted, dying also daily deaths— was

so far from grieving or being discontented, that he gloried, and rejoiced, and
said, "I now rejoice in my sufferings, and fill up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh." [Colossians 1:24] And again: "And not only so,
but we glory in tribulations." [Romans 5:3] Now, glorying signifies an extension
of pleasure.
11. If then you desire joy, seek not after riches, nor bodily health, nor glory,
nor power, nor luxury, nor sumptuous tables, nor vestures of silk, nor costly
lands, nor houses splendid and conspicuous, nor any thing else of that kind; but
pursue that spiritual wisdom which is according to God, and take hold of virtue;
and then nought of the things which are present, or which are expected, will be
able to sadden you. Why do I say to sadden? Verily, the things that make others
sad, will prove to you an accession of pleasure. For scourges, and death, and
losses, and slanders, and the being evil entreated, and all such things, when they
are brought upon us for God's sake, and spring from this root, will bring into our
souls much pleasure. For no one will be able to make us miserable, if we do not
make ourselves such; nor, on the other hand, blessed, if we do not make
ourselves such, following up the grace of God.
12. And that you may learn that he only is blessed, who fears the Lord, I
will now demonstrate this to you, not by what has happened in past times, but by
what has befallen ourselves. Our city was in danger of being utterly effaced; and
no man among the rich, or eminent, or illustrious, dared to appear in public, but
all fled, and hurried out of the way. But they who feared God, the men who
passed their time in monasteries, hastened down with much boldness, and set all
free from this terror; and the terrible events that had taken place, and the threats
which had been expected to be put into execution, were so far from causing them
to fear, or from throwing them into anxiety, that although they were placed far
off from the calamity, and had no share in it, they cast themselves willingly into
the midst of the fire, and rescued all; and as for death, which seems universally
terrible and awful, they awaited it with the utmost readiness, and ran to meet it
with more pleasure than others do towards principalities and honours. And why,