But do thou mark, I pray you, how He aggravates this accusation also. For
He did not say, "they cannot," but, "they will not." And He did not say, "to bear,"
but, "to move with a finger," that is, not even to come near them, nor to touch
them.
But wherein are they earnest, and vigorous? In the things forbidden. For,
"all their works they do," He says, "to be seen of men." [Matthew 23:5] These
things He says, accusing them in respect of vainglory, which kind of thing was
their ruin. For the things before were signs of harshness and remissness, but
these of the mad desire of glory. This drew them off from God, this caused them
to strive before other spectators, and ruined them. For whatever kind of
spectators any one may have, since it has become his study to please these, such
also are the contests he exhibits. And he that wrestles among the noble, such also
are the conflicts he takes in hand, but he among the cold and supine, himself also
becomes more remiss. For instance, has any one a beholder that delights in
ridicule? He himself too becomes a mover of ridicule, that he may delight the
spectator: has another one who is earnest minded, and practises selfgovernment? He endeavors himself to be such as he is, since such is the
disposition of him who praises him.
But see again that here too the charge is with aggravation. For neither is it
that they do some things in this way, some in another way, but all things
absolutely this way.
Then, having blamed them for vainglory, He shows that it is not even about
great and necessary things they are vainglorious (for neither had they these, but
were destitute of good works), but for things without warmth or worth, and such
as were certain proofs of their baseness, the phylacteries, the borders; of their
garments. "For they make broad their phylacteries," He says, "and enlarge the
borders of their garments." [Matthew 23:5]
And what are these phylacteries, and these borders? Since they were
continually forgetting God's benefits, He commanded His marvellous works to
be inscribed on little tablets, and that these should be suspended from their hands

(wherefore also He said, "They shall be immoveable in your eyes"), which they
called phylacteries; as many of our women now wear Gospels hung from their
necks. And in order that by another thing again they may be reminded, like as
many often do, binding round their finger with a piece of linen or a thread, as
being likely to forget, this God enjoined them as children to do, "to sew a ribbon
of blue on their garments, upon the fringe that hung round their feet, that they
might look at it, and remember the commandments;" and they were called
"borders."
In these things then they were diligent, making wide the strips of the
tablets, and enlarging the borders of their garments; which was a sign of the most
extreme vanity. For wherefore are you vainglorious, and dost make these wide?
What, is this your good work? What does it profit you at all, if you gain not the
good results from them. For God seeks not the enlarging of these and making
them wide, but our remembering His benefits. But if for almsgiving and prayer,
although they be attended with labor, and be good deeds on our parts, we must
not seek vainglory, how do you, O Jew, pride yourself in these things, which
most of all convict your remissness.
But they not in these only, but in other little things, suffered from this
disease.
For, "they love," He says, "the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief
seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be called of men,
Rabbi." For these things, although one may think them small, yet are they a
cause of great evils. These things have overthrown both cities and churches.
And it comes upon me now even to weep, when I hear of the first seats, and
the greetings, and consider how many ills were hence engendered to the
churches of God, which it is not necessary to publish to you now; nay rather as
many as are aged men do not even need to learn these things from us.
But mark thou, I pray you, how vainglory prevailed; when they were
commanded not to be vainglorious, even in the synagogues, where they had
entered to discipline others.