advantage accrued to him thereby, towards deliverance from his bonds? For not
for Christ's sake had he been cast into prison, nor for having proclaimed His
power, but for his own rebuke touching the unlawful marriage. And what child
so silly, what person so frantic, but that so he would have put on himself their
character?
2. What then is it which he is bringing about? For that it belongs not to John
to have doubt hereupon, no nor to any ordinary person, nor even to one
extremely foolish and frenzied; so much is evident from what we have said. And
now we have only to add the solution.
For what intent then did he send to ask? John's disciples were starting aside
from Jesus, and this surely any one may see, and they had always a jealous
feeling towards Him. And it is plain, from what they said to their master: "He
that was with you," it is said, "beyond Jordan, to whom you bore witness, behold,
the same baptizes, and all men come unto Him." [John 3:26] And again, "There
arose a question between John's disciples and the Jews about purifying." And
again they came unto Him, and said, "Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but
Your disciples fast not?" [Matthew 9:14] For as yet they knew not who Christ
was, but imagining Jesus to be a mere man, but John greater than after the
manner of man, were vexed at seeing the former held in estimation, but the
latter, as he had said, now ceasing. And this hindered them from coming unto
Him, their jealousy quite blocking up the access. Now so long as John was with
them, he was exhorting them continually and instructing them, and not even so
did he persuade them; but when he was now on the point of dying, he uses the
more diligence: fearing as he did lest he might leave a foundation for bad
doctrine, and they continue broken off from Christ. For as he was diligent even
at first to bring to Christ all that pertained to himself; so on his failing to
persuade them, now towards his end he does but exert the more zeal.
Now if he had said, "Go ye away unto Him, He is better than I," he would
not have persuaded them, minded as they were not easily to be separated from
him, but rather he would have been thought to say it out of modesty, and they

would have been the more rivetted to him; or if he had held his peace, then again
nothing was gained. What then does he? He waits to hear from them that Christ
is working miracles, and not even so does he admonish them, nor does he send
all, but some two (whom he perhaps knew to be more teachable than the rest);
that the inquiry might be made without suspicion, in order that from His acts
they might learn the difference between Jesus and himself. And he says, Go, and
say, "Are you He that should come, or do we look for another?" [Matthew 11:3]
But Christ knowing the purpose of John, did not say, I am He; for this
would again have offended the hearers, although this was what it naturally
followed for Him to say, but He leaves them to learn it from His acts. For it says,
when these had come to Him, then "He cured many." [Luke 7:21] And yet what
congruity was there, that being asked, "Are you He," He should say nothing to
that, but should presently cure them that were sick; unless it had been His mind
to establish this which I have mentioned? Because they of course would account
the testimony of His deeds surer, and more above suspicion than that of His
words.
Knowing therefore, as being God, the mind with which John had sent them,
He straightway cured blind, lame, and many others; not to teach him (for how
should He him that was convinced), but these that were doubting: and having
healed them, He says,
"Go and show John again those things which you do hear and see; the
blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, and the lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached
unto them." [Matthew 4:5] And he added, "And blessed is he, whosoever shall
not be offended in me;" implying that He knows even their unuttered thoughts.
For if He had said, "I am He," both this would have offended them, as I have
already said; and they would have thought, even if they had not spoken, much as
the Jews said to Him, "You bear record of Yourself." Wherefore He says not this
Himself, but leaves them to learn all from the miracles, freeing what He taught
from suspicion, and making it plainer. Wherefore also He covertly added His