our minds. This fountain is a fountain of light, spouting forth rays of truth. By it
stand the Powers on high looking upon the beauty of its streams, because they
more clearly perceive the power of the Things set forth, and the flashings
unapproachable. For as when gold is being molten if one should (were it
possible) dip in it his hand or his tongue, he would immediately render them
golden; thus, but in much greater degree, does what here is set forth work upon
the soul. Fiercer than fire the river boils up, yet burns not, but only baptizes that
on which it lays hold. This blood was ever typified of old in the altars and
sacrifices of righteous men, This is the price of the world, by This Christ
purchased to Himself the Church, by This He has adorned Her all. For as a man
buying servants gives gold for them, and again when he desires to deck them out
does this also with gold; so Christ has purchased us with His blood, and adorned
us with His blood. They who share this blood stand with Angels and Archangels
and the Powers that are above, clothed in Christ's own kingly robe, and having
the armor of the Spirit. Nay, I have not as yet said any great thing: they are
clothed with the King Himself.
Now as this is a great and wonderful thing, so if you approach it with
pureness, you approach for salvation; but if with an evil conscience, for
punishment and vengeance. "For," It says, "he that eats and drinks unworthily"
of the Lord, "eats and drinks judgment to himself" [1 Corinthians 11:29]; since if
they who defile the kingly purple are punished equally with those who rend it, it
is not unreasonable that they who receive the Body with unclean thoughts should
suffer the same punishment as those who rent it with the nails. Observe at least
how fearful a punishment Paul declares, when he says, "He that despised Moses'
law dies without mercy under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing?" [Hebrews 1:28] Take we then heed to ourselves,
beloved, we who enjoy such blessings; and if we desire to utter any shameful
word, or perceive ourselves hurried away by wrath or any like passion, let us

consider of what things we have been deemed worthy, of how great a Spirit we
have partaken, and this consideration shall be a sobering of our unreasonable
passions. For how long shall we be nailed to present things? How long shall it be
before we rouse ourselves? How long shall we neglect our own salvation? Let us
bear in mind of what things Christ has deemed us worthy, let us give thanks, let
us glorify Him, not by our faith alone, but also by our very works, that we may
obtain the good things that are to come, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy
Ghost be glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.