(p. 28). "The imaginative faculty performs its actions without perceiving that things are
according to its imaginings" (p. 28). "The imaginative faculty may imagine things other
than that which the judgement considers desirable" (p. 29). If we might assume that this
`imagination' is purely reproductive of sense phantasms, it would answer to the
`phantasy' (imaginatio) which St Thomas ascribes to Avicenna. III. Judgement. "Then in
animals there is a faculty which decides decisively upon a thing, whether it is this or not.
And by it the animal flies from that which is to be guarded against, and seeks that which
is desirable. This faculty is called the judging and the supposing faculty" (pp. 28, 29). It
is not difficult to recognise here that highest faculty of animal nature, called in other
animals vis aestimativa, in man vis cogitativa (Chap.LX). IV. Memory. "Then there
is in animals a faculty which preserves the meaning of that which the faculties have
conceived, e.g., that the wolf is an enemy." It is a store-house of judgements rather than
of sense perceptions: for "the senses do not perceive the enmity of the wolf; or the love
of the child": only the vis aestimativa perceives that, "then it treasures them up in this
faculty." It is not a store-house of fancies, as the "imagination" is: for "this faculty does
not picture anything which the judgement does not approve. This faculty does not
declare anything to be true, but preserves what something else declares to be true. And
this faculty is called the preserving and remembering faculty" (p. 29). All this answers
exactly to the account of "memory" which St Thomas attributes to Avicenna. We come
now to the main argument of this chapter, which is Avicenna's belief in the `active
intellect' as a separate intelligence, working causatively upon the mind of man, and
generating therein universal concepts, such concepts not being stored in the human
mind for future use, but directly created afresh for every recurrence of them, by the
action of this extrinsic intelligence. Against this doctrine of Avicenna, Averroes writes
explicitly (De animae beatitudine, cap. iii, p. 151): Intellectus agens non tantum est
causa in intellectu materiali [sc. possibili] per viam efficientis et motoris, sed per viam
ultimae perfectionis, hoc est, per viam formae et finis. (Seenote, p. 135.) Averroes
united the active and the potential intellect, and made both eternal: Avicenna and
Alexander made the active intellect alone eternal. Avicenna's theory of the universal
active intellect is thus given in his own quaint words. -- " The proving of the existence of
an intellectual essence, distinct from bodies, standing in the relation of light to sight, and
in the place of a fountain: and the proving that, when human souls separate from
bodies, they unite with this essence" (Title of Section x, p. 40). Speaking of the belief in
mathematical axioms, he says: "It must be either by the use of sense and experiment,
or by divine continuous overflow, . . . . overflow continuous with the rational soul, and
the rational soul continuous with it. . . . This overflow, which is continuous with the soul,
is an intellectual essence, not a body, not in a body: it stands by itself, holding the
relation to the intellectual soul of light to sight" (pp. 40, 41). "The soul remains after
death ever immortal, joined on to this noble essence, which is universal intelligence" (p.
42). In Avicenna, as in Averroes, one recognises in the doctrine of ittisl however
misdirected, that craving for some connexion of man's intelligence with a spirit above his
own, which a banal materialism or positivism labours to extirpate, making man highest
of beings and (perforce) self-sufficient. That craving is the root of mysticism; and in the
doctrine of the Incarnation, with its corollaries of grace and sacraments, it has become
the animating principle of Christianity.