Acts ii. 37, 38.

3. Again, when Peter, accompanied by John, had looked upon the man lame from his birth,
before that gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, sitting and seeking alms, he said to him,
"Silver and gold I have none; but such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
rise up and walk. And immediately his legs and his feet received strength; and he walked, and
entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God." Then, when a
multitude had gathered around them from all quarters because of this unexpected deed, Peter
addressed them: "Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this; or why look ye so earnestly on us, as
though by our own power we had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified His Son, whom ye delivered up for
judgment, and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he wished to let Him go. But ye were
bitterly set against the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you;
but ye killed the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses.
And in the faith of His name, him, whom ye see and know, hath His name made strong; yea, the
faith which is by Him, hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all. And now,
brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did this wickedness. É But those things which God
before had showed by the mouth of all the prophets, that His Christ should suffer, He hath so
fulfilled. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, and that the
times of refreshing may come to you from the presence of the Lord; and He shall send Jesus Christ,
prepared for you beforehand, whom the heaven must indeed receive until the times of the
arrangement of all things, of which God hath spoken by His holy prophets. For Moses truly said
unto our fathers, Your Lord God shall raise up to you a Prophet from your brethren, like unto me;
Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever He shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that
every soul, whosoever will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. And
all [the prophets] from Samuel, and henceforth, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of
these days. Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our
fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Unto
you first, God, having raised up His Son, sent Him blessing you, that each may turn himself from

These interpolations are also found in the Codex Bezæ.
textus receptus.

his iniquities." Peter, together with John, preached to them this plain message of glad tidings,
that the promise which God made to the fathers had been fulfilled by Jesus; not certainly proclaiming
another god, but the Son of God, who also was made man, and suffered; thus leading Israel into
knowledge, and through Jesus preaching the resurrection of the dead, and showing, that whatever
the prophets had proclaimed as to the suffering of Christ, these had God fulfilled.
4. For this reason, too, when the chief priests were assembled, Peter, full of boldness, said to
them, "Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel, if we this day be examined by you of the good
deed done to the impotent man, by what means he has been made whole; be it known to you all,
and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified,
whom God raised from the dead, even by Him doth this man stand here before you whole. This is
the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head-stone of the corner.
[Neither is there salvation in any other: for] there is none other name under heaven, which is given
to men, whereby we must be saved:" Thus the apostles did not change God, but preached to the
people that Christ was Jesus the crucified One, whom the same God that had sent the prophets,
being God Himself, raised up, and gave in Him salvation to men.
5. They were confounded, therefore, both by this instance of healing ("for the man was above
forty years old on whom this miracle of healing took place"), and by the doctrine of the apostles,
and by the exposition of the prophets, when the chief priests had sent away Peter and John. [These
latter] returned to the rest of their fellow-apostles and disciples of the Lord, that is, to the Church,
and related what had occurred, and how courageously they had acted in the name of Jesus. The
whole Church, it is then said, "when they had heard that, lifted up the voice to God with one accord,
and said, Lord, Thou art God, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that in them
is; who, through the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of our father David, Thy servant, hast said, Why
did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? The kings of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against His Christ. For of a truth, in this city,
against Thy holy Son Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered together, to do whatsoever Thy hand and Thy
counsel determined before to be done." These [are the] voices of the Church from which every