But the sensible natures known to us do not adequately reveal the divine essence or even other
separate essences, since naturally considered they do not belong to one genus; and quiddity and
all such terms predicated almost equivocally of sensible things and of these substances. That is
why Dionysius calls the likenesses of sensible things, transferred to immaterial substances,
"unlike likenesses, which intellectual beings participate in one way and sensible beings in
another." Consequently, we cannot have adequate knowledge of the former from the latter by

way of likeness or even by way of causality, because the effects of those substances found in
lower beings do not measure up to their powers so that we can come to know the essence of their
cause in this way.

Accordingly, in the present life it is absolutely impossible to know the essence of immaterial
substances, not only (~) by natural knowledge but also (~) by revelation; for, as Dionysius say,
the light of divine revelation comes to us adapted to our condition. Thus even though revelation
elevates us to know something of which we should otherwise be ignorant, it does not elevate us
to know in any other way than through sensible things. Thus Dionysius says: "It is impossible
for the divine light to illumine us from above unless it be hidden within the covering of many
sacred veils." Now knowledge by way of the sensible is inadequate to enable us to know the
essences of immaterial substances. So we conclude that we do not know what immaterial forms
are, but only that they are, whether by natural reason based upon created effects or even by
revelation, by means of likenesses taken from sensible things.

It should be noticed, however, that we cannot know that a thing is without knowing in some way
what it is, either perfectly or at least confusedly, as the Philosopher says we know things defined
before we know the parts of their definition. For if a person knows that man exists and wants to
find out what man is by definition, he must know the meaning of the term "man." And this is
possible only if he somehow forms a concept of what he knows to exist, even though he does
not know its definition. That is to say, he forms a concept of man by knowing a proximate or
remote genus and accidental characteristics which reveal him externally. For our knowledge of
definitions, like that of demonstrations, must begin with some previous knowledge.

Similarly, therefore, we cannot know that God and other immaterial substances exist unless we
know somehow, in some confused way, what they are. (~) Now we cannot do this by knowing a
proximate or remote genus, for God is in no genus, since his essence is not distinct from his
being; a condition required in all genera, as Avicenna says. Created immaterial substances,
however, are indeed in a genus; but even though from the viewpoint of logic they share the same
remote genus of substance with sensible substances, from the viewpoint of physics they do not
belong to the same genus, as neither do heavenly and terrestrial bodies. For the corruptible and
the incorruptible do not belong to the same genus, as the Metaphysics says. For the logician
considers concepts in themselves; and from this point of view nothing prevents the immaterial
and the material, or the incorruptible and the corruptible, from having something in common. But
the philosopher of nature and the metaphysician treat of essences as existing in reality; and
therefore they say that there are different genera wherever they find diverse modes of potency
and act, and consequently diverse modes of being. Neither has God any accidental
characteristics, as we will prove later. If other immaterial substances have such characteristics,
we do not know them. Accordingly, we cannot say that we know immaterial substances
obscurely by knowing their genus and observable accidents.