mere boast, the miracles, and the obedience of the Gentiles show. "For I will not
dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has not wrought by me, to make
the Gentiles obedient by word and deed, through signs and wonders, by the
power of the Spirit of God." See how violently he tries to show that the whole is
God's doing, and nothing his own. For whether I speak anything, or do anything,
or work miracles, He does all of them, the Holy Spirit all. And this he says to
show the dignity of the Holy Spirit also. See how these things are more
wondrous and more awful than those of old, the sacrifice, the offering, the
symbols. For when he says, "in word and deed, through mighty signs and
wonders," he means this, the doctrine, the system ([φιλοσοφίαν]) relating to the
Kingdom, the exhibition of actions and conversation, the dead that were raised,
the devils that were cast out, and the blind that were healed, and the lame that
leaped, and the other marvellous acts, all whereof the Holy Spirit wrought in us.
Then the proof of these things (since all this is yet but an assertion) is the
multitude of the disciples. Wherefore he adds, "So that from Jerusalem, and
round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ." Count
up then cities, and places, and nations, and peoples, not those under the Romans
only, but those also under barbarians. For I would not have you go the whole
way through Phœnicia, and Syria, and the Cilicians, and Cappadocians, but
reckon up also the parts behind, the country of the Saracens, and Persians, and
Armenians, and that of the other savage nations. For this is why he said, "round
about," that you might not only go through the direct high road, but that you
should run over the whole, even the southern part of Asia in your mind. And as
he ran over miracles thick as snow, in a single word, by saying, "through mighty
signs and wonders," so he has comprehended again endless cities, and nations,
and peoples, and places, in this one word "round about." For he was far removed
from all boasting. And this, he said on their account, so that they should not be
conceited about themselves. And at the beginning he said, that "I might have
some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles." But here he states the
compulsion of his priesthood. For as he had spoken in a sharper tone, he shows

also by it his power more clearly. This is why he there only says, "even as
among other Gentiles." But here he insists on the topic fully, so that the conceit
may be pruned away on all grounds. And he does not merely say, preached the
Gospel, but "have fully preached the Gospel of Christ."
Ver. 20. "Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was
named."
See here another preeminence; that he had not only preached the Gospel to
so many, and persuaded them, but he did not even go to those who had become
disciples. So far was he from thrusting himself upon other men's disciples, and
from doing this for glory's sake, that he even made it a point to teach those who
had not heard. For neither does he say where they were not persuaded, but
"where Christ was not even named," which is more. And what was the reason
why he had this ambition? "Lest I should build," he says, "upon another man's
foundation."
This he says to show himself a stranger to vanity, and to instruct them that it
was not from any love of glory, or of honor from them, that he came to write, but
as fulfilling his ministry, as perfecting his priestly duty, as loving their salvation.
But he calls the foundation of the Apostles "another man's," not in regard to the
quality of the person, or the nature of preaching, but in regard to the question of
reward. For it was not that the preaching was that of another man, but so far as it
went to another man's reward. For the reward of the labors of others was, to this
man, another man's. Then he shows that a prophecy was fulfilled also saying,
Ver. 21. "As it is written, To whom He was not spoken of, they shall see, and
they that have not heard shall understand." [Isaiah 3:15 [Septuagint]]
You see he runs to where the labor is more, the toil greater.
Ver. 22. "For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to
you."
Observe again, how he makes the end of the like texture with the
introduction. For while he was quite at the beginning of the Epistle, he said,
"Oftentimes I purpose to come unto you, but was let hitherto." [Romans 1:13]