SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.127, C.2.

Reply to Objection 5: Perseverance as denoting persistence in a
good deed unto the end, may be a circumstance of every virtue, but
it is reckoned a part of fortitude in the sense stated in the body of the
Article.
Reply to Objection 6: Macrobius reckons the four aforesaid
mentioned by Tully, namely "confidence, magnificence,
forbearance," which he puts in the place of patience, and "firmness,"
which he substitutes for perseverance. And he adds three, two of
which, namely "magnanimity" and "security," are comprised by Tully
under the head of confidence. But Macrobius is more specific in his
enumeration. Because confidence denotes a man's hope for great
things: and hope for anything presupposes an appetite stretching
forth to great things by desire, and this belongs to magnanimity. For
it has been stated above (FS, Question 40, Article 2) that hope
presupposes love and desire of the thing hoped for.
A still better reply is that confidence pertains to the certitude of
hope; while magnanimity refers to the magnitude of the thing hoped
for. Now hope has no firmness unless its contrary be removed, for
sometimes one, for one's own part, would hope for something, but
hope is avoided on account of the obstacle of fear, since fear is
somewhat contrary to hope, as stated above, (FS, Question 40,
Article 4, ad 1). Hence Macrobius adds security, which banishes fear.
He adds a third, namely constancy, which may be comprised under
magnificence. For in performing deeds of magnificence one needs to
have a constant mind. For this reason Tully says that magnificence
consists not only in accomplishing great things, but also in
discussing them generously in the mind. Constancy may also
pertain to perseverance, so that one may be called persevering
through not desisting on account of delays, and constant through
not desisting on account of any other obstacles.
Those that are mentioned by Andronicus seem to amount to the
same as the above. For with Tully and Macrobius he mentions
"perseverance" and "magnificence," and with Macrobius,
"magnanimity." "Strength of will" is the same as patience or
forbearance, for he says that "strength of will is a habit that makes
one ready to attempt what ought to be attempted, and to endure what
reason says should be endured"---i.e. good courage seems to be the
same as assurance, for he defines it as "strength of soul in the
accomplishment of its purpose." Manliness is apparently the same
as confidence, for he says that "manliness is a habit of self
SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.127, C.2.

sufficiency in matters of virtue." Besides magnificence he mentions
andragathia, i.e. manly goodness which we may render
"strenuousness." For magnificence consists not only in being
constant in the accomplishment of great deeds, which belongs to
constancy, but also in bringing a certain manly prudence and
solicitude to that accomplishment, and this belongs to andragathia,
strenuousness: wherefore he says that andragathia is the virtue of a
man, whereby he thinks out profitable works.
Accordingly it is evident that all these parts may be reduced to the
four principal parts mentioned by Tully.
Reply to Objection 7: The five mentioned by Aristotle fall short of the
true notion of virtue, for though they concur in the act of fortitude,
they differ as to motive, as stated above (Question 123, Article 1, ad
2); wherefore they are not reckoned parts but modes of fortitude.