John 5:20
"The Father loves the Son, and shows Him all things that Himself does; and He
will show Him greater works than these."
Do you see how great is the humility of this? And with reason; for what I
said before, what I shall not cease to say, I will now repeat, that when He utters
anything low or humbly, He puts it in excess, that the very poverty of the
expression may persuade even the indisposed to receive the notions with pious
understanding. Since, if it be not so, see how absurd a thing is asserted, making
the trial from the words themselves. For when He says, "And shall show Him
greater works than these," He will be found not to have yet learned many things,
which cannot be said even of the Apostles; for they when they had once received
the grace of the Spirit, in a moment both knew and were able to do all things
which it was needful that they should know and have power to do, while Christ
will be found to have not yet learned many things which He needed to know.
And what can be more absurd than this?
What then is His meaning? It was because He had strengthened the
paralytic, and was about to raise the dead, that He thus spoke, all but saying,
"Wonder ye that I have strengthened the paralyzed? You shall see greater things
than these." But He spoke not thus, but proceeded somehow in a humbler strain,
in order that He might soothe their madness. And that you may learn that "shall
show" is not used absolutely, listen again to what follows.

John 5:21
"For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickens them, even so the Son
quickens whom He will."
Yet "can do nothing of Himself" is opposed to "whom He will": since if He
quickens "whom He will," He can do something "of Himself," (for to "will"
implies power,) but if He "can do nothing of Himself," then He can not "quicken
whom He will." For the expression, "as the Father raises up," shows unvarying
resemblance in Power, and "whom He will," Equality of Authority. Do you see
therefore that "cannot do anything of Himself" is the expression of One not
taking away His (own) authority, but declaring the unvarying resemblance of His
Power and Will (to those of the Father)? In this sense also understand the words,
"shall show to Him"; for in another place He says, "I will raise him up at the last
Day." [John 6:40] And again, to show that He does it not by receiving an inward
power from above, He says, "I am the Resurrection and the Life." [John 11:25]
Then that you may not assert that He raises what dead He will and quickens
them, but that He does not other things in such manner, He anticipates and
prevents every objection of the kind by saying, "What things soever He does,
these also does the Son likewise," thus declaring that He does all things which
the Father does, and as the Father does them; whether you speak of the raising of
the dead, or the fashioning of bodies, or the remission of sins, or any other
matter whatever, He works in like manner to Him who begot Him.
5. But men careless of their salvation give heed to none of these things; so
great an evil is it to be in love with precedence. This has been the mother of
heresies, this has confirmed the impiety of the heathen. For God desired that His
invisible things should be understood by the creation of this world [Romans
1:20], but they having left these and refused to come by this mode of teaching,
cut out for themselves another way, and so were cast out from the true. And the
Jews believed not because they received honor from one another, and sought not