the end was about to draw near. And yet already four hundred years were passed,
nay more, in Egypt. But this is the wonder of it. "The same dealt subtly with our
kindred, and evil-entreated our fathers, that they should cast out their young
children, to the end they might not live." [Acts 7:19] "Dealt subtly:" he hints at
their not liking to exterminate them openly: "that they should cast out their
young children," it says. "In which time Moses was born and was exceeding
fair." [Acts 7:20] This is the wonder, that he who is to be their champion, is born,
neither after nor before, these things, but in the very midst of the storm ([θυμῷ]).
"And was nourished up in his father's house three months." But when man's help
was despaired of, and they cast him forth, then did God's benefit shine forth
conspicuous. "And when he was cast out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and
nourished him for her own son." [Acts 7:21] Not a word of Temple, not a word
of Sacrifice, while all these Providences are taking place. And he was nourished
in a barbarian house. "And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds." [Acts 7:22] "Was trained,"
both in discipline and in letters. "And when he was full forty years old." [Acts
7:23] Forty years he was there, and was not found out from his being
circumcised. Observe, how, being in safety, they overlook their own interests,
both he and Joseph, in order that they may save others: "And when he was full
forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel.
And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that
was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian: for he supposed his brethren would
have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they
understood not." [Acts 7:23-25]— See how up to this point he is not yet
offensive to them; how they listened to him while he said all this. And "his face,"
we read, "was as the face of an angel" [Acts 6:15].— "For he supposed," etc.
And yet it was by deeds that his championship was shown; what intelligence was
there need of here? But still for all this "they understood not. And the next day he
showed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again,
saying, Sirs, you are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another?" [Acts 7:26-28]

Do you mark with what mildness he addresses them? He who had shown his
wrath in the case of the other, shows his gentleness in his own case. "But he that
did his neighbor wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made you a ruler and a
judge over us? Will you kill me, as you did the Egyptian yesterday?" Mark; the
very words which they said to Christ: "Who made You ruler and judge over us?"
So habitual a thing was it for Jews to wrong (their benefactors) when in the act
of receiving benefits! And again, mark the atrocious baseness: ([μιαρίαν] al.
[μοχθηρίαν], Sav. marg.) "As you did the Egyptian yesterday! Then fled Moses at
this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Midian, where he begot two sons."
[Acts 7:29] But neither did flight extinguish the plan of Providence, as neither
did death (i.e. the death of Christ).
"And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the
wilderness of mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush."
[Acts 7:30] Do you mark that it is not hindered by lapse of time? For when he
was an exile, when a stranger, when he had now passed much time in a foreign
land, so as to have two sons, when he no longer expected to return, then does the
Angel appear to him. The Son of God he calls an Angel, as also he calls Him
man. (Appears) in the desert, not in a temple. See how many miracles are taking
place, and no word of Temple, no word of Sacrifice. And here also not simply in
the desert, but in the bush. "When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: and as
he drew near to behold it, the voice of the Lord came unto him." [Acts 7:31] Lo!
He was deemed worthy of the Voice also. "I am the God of your fathers, the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." (v. 32, 33.) Lo! how
He shows that He is none other than "the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob"— He, "the Angel of the Great Counsel." (Isaiah 9:6.
LXX. "Wonderful, Counsellor," E.V.) Here he shows what great loving-kindness
God herein exhibits. "Then Moses trembled, and dared not behold. Then said the
Lord to him, Put off your shoes from your feet; for the place where you stand is
holy ground." Not a word of Temple, and the place is holy through the
appearance and operation of Christ. Far more wonderful this than the place