reason which of all others most prevailed with him, "I have much people in this
city." Then how was it, you may ask, that they set upon him? And yet, the writer
tells us, they prevailed nothing, but brought him to the proconsul. "And he
continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
And when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one
accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment-seat." (v. 11, 12.) Do you
mark why those men were ever contriving to give a public turn to the
misdemeanors (they accused them of)? Thus see here: (b) "Saying, This fellow
seduces men contrary to the law to worship God. And when Paul was about to
open his mouth, Gallio said: If indeed it were any wrong-doing or wicked
lewdness, O you Jews, reason would that I should bear with you. But if it be a
question of words and names, and of your law, look ye to it; for I will be no
judge of such matters. And he drove them from the judgment-seat." [Acts 18:1316] This Gallio seems to me to have been a sensible man. (a) Thus observe,
when these had said, "Against the law he seduces men to worship God," he
"cared for none of these things:" and observe how he answers them: "If indeed it
were" any matter affecting the city, "any wrong-doing or wicked lewdness," etc.
(c) "Then all the Jews took Sosthenes the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him
before the judgment-seat: and Gallio cared for none of these things" [Acts
18:17]: but their beating him he did not take as an insult to himself. So petulant
were the Jews. But let us look over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "And when they heard," [Acts 17:32] what great and lofty
doctrines, they did not even attend, but jeered at the Resurrection! "For the
natural man," it says, "receives not the things of the Spirit." [1 Corinthians 2:14]
"And so," it says, "Paul went forth." [Acts 17:33] How? Having persuaded some;
derided by others. "But certain men," it says, "clave unto him, and believed,
among whom was also Dionysius the Areopagite and some others." [Acts 17:34]
"And after these things," etc. "And having found a certain Jew by name Aquila,
of Pontus by birth, lately come from Italy, because that Claudius had ordered all
Jews to depart from Rome, he came to them, and because he was of the same

craft, he abode with them, and wrought: for by their occupation they were tentmakers." [Acts 18:1-3] Being of Pontus, this Aquila * * * . Observe how, not in
Jerusalem, nor near it (the crisis), was hasting to come, but at a greater distance.
And with him he abides, and is not ashamed to abide, nay, for this very reason he
does abide, as having a suitable lodging-place, for to him it was much more
suitable than any king's palace. And smile not thou, beloved, to hear (of his
occupation). For (it was good for him) even as to the athlete the palæstra is more
useful than delicate carpets; so to the warrior the iron sword (is useful), not that
of gold. "And wrought," though he preached. Let us be ashamed, who though we
have no preaching to occupy us, live in idleness. "And he disputed in the
synagogue every sabbath day, and persuaded both Jews and Greeks" [Acts
18:4]: but "when they opposed and blasphemed" he withdrew, by this expecting
to draw them more. For wherefore having left that house did he come to live
hard by the synagogue? Was it not for this? For it was not that he saw any danger
here. But therefore it is that Paul having testified to them— not teaches now, but
testifies— "having shaken his garments," to terrify them not by word only but by
action, "said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads" [Acts 18:6]: he
speaks the more vehemently as having already persuaded many. "I," says he,
"am clean." Then we also are accountable for the blood of those entrusted to us,
if we neglect them. "From this time forth I will go to the Gentiles." So that also
when he says, "Henceforth let no man trouble me" [Galatians 6:17], he says it to
terrify. For not so much did the punishment terrify, as this stung them. "And
having removed thence he came into the house of one named Justus, that
worshipped God, whose house was contiguous to the synagogue" [Acts 18:7],
and there abode, by this wishing to persuade them that he was in earnest ([πρὸς
τὰ ἐθνη ἠπείγετο]) to go to the Gentiles. Accordingly, mark immediately the
ruler of the synagogue converted, and many others, when he had done this.
"Crispus the ruler of the synagogue believed in the Lord, with his whole house:
and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized."— [Acts
18:8] "With his whole house:" observe the converts in those times doing this