inferior bodies, is contained in them. In this way also we say that all
things are like God.
Reply to Objection 4: The actions of heavenly bodies are variously
received in inferior bodies, according to the various dispositions of
matter. Now it happens at times that the matter in the human
conception is not wholly disposed to the male sex; wherefore it is
formed sometimes into a male, sometimes into a female. Augustine
quotes this as an argument against divination by stars: because the
effects of the stars are varied even in corporeal things, according to
the various dispositions of matter.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the heavenly bodies are the cause of

human actions?
Objection 1: It would seem that the heavenly bodies are the cause of
human actions. For since the heavenly bodies are moved by spiritual
substances, as stated above (Question 110, Article 3), they act by
virtue thereof as their instruments. But those spiritual substances
are superior to our souls. Therefore it seems that they can cause
impressions on our souls, and thereby cause human actions.
Objection 2: Further, every multiform is reducible to a uniform
principle. But human actions are various and multiform. Therefore it
seems that they are reducible to the uniform movements of heavenly
bodies, as to their principles.
Objection 3: Further, astrologers often foretell the truth concerning
the outcome of wars, and other human actions, of which the intellect
and will are the principles. But they could not do this by means of
the heavenly bodies, unless these were the cause of human actions.
Therefore the heavenly bodies are the cause of human actions.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 7) that "the
heavenly bodies are by no means the cause of human actions."
I answer that, The heavenly bodies can directly and of themselves
act on bodies, as stated above (Article 3). They can act directly
indeed on those powers of the soul which are the acts of corporeal
organs, but accidentally: because the acts of such powers must
needs be hindered by obstacles in the organs; thus an eye when
disturbed cannot see well. Wherefore if the intellect and will were
powers affixed to corporeal organs, as some maintained, holding
that intellect does not differ from sense; it would follow of necessity
that the heavenly bodies are the cause of human choice and action.
It would also follow that man is led by natural instinct to his actions,
just as other animals, in which there are powers other than those
which are affixed to corporeal organs: for whatever is done here
below in virtue of the action of heavenly bodies, is done naturally. It
would therefore follow that man has no free-will, and that he would
have determinate actions, like other natural things. All of which is
manifestly false, and contrary to human habit. It must be observed,
however, that indirectly and accidentally, the impressions of