to know. Hence it is written (Dt. 13:3): "The Lord your God trieth you,
that it may appear whether you love him."
The flesh and the world are said to tempt as the instruments or
matter of temptations; inasmuch as one can know what sort of man
someone is, according as he follows or resists the desires of the
flesh, and according as he despises worldly advantages and
adversity: of which things the devil also makes use in tempting.
Thus the reply to the first objection is clear.
Reply to Objection 2: The demons know what happens outwardly
among men; but the inward disposition of man God alone knows,
Who is the "weigher of spirits" (Prov. 16:2). It is this disposition that
makes man more prone to one vice than to another: hence the devil
tempts, in order to explore this inward disposition of man, so that he
may tempt him to that vice to which he is most prone.
Reply to Objection 3: Although a demon cannot change the will, yet,
as stated above (Question 111, Article 3), he can change the inferior
powers of man, in a certain degree: by which powers, though the will
cannot be forced, it can nevertheless be inclined.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether all sins are due to the temptation of the

devil?
Objection 1: It would seem that all sins are due to the temptation of
the devil. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that "the multitude of
demons is the cause of all evils, both to themselves and to others."
And Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 4) that "all malice and all
uncleanness have been devised by the devil."
Objection 2: Further, of every sinner can be said what the Lord said
of the Jews (Jn. 8:44): "You are of your father the devil." But this was
in as far as they sinned through the devil's instigation. Therefore
every sin is due to the devil's instigation.
Objection 3: Further, as angels are deputed to guard men, so
demons are deputed to assail men. But every good thing we do is
due to the suggestion of the good angels: because the Divine gifts
are borne to us by the angels. Therefore all the evil we do, is due to
the instigation of the devil.
On the contrary, It is written (De Eccl. Dogmat. xlix): "Not all our evil
thoughts are stirred up by the devil, but sometimes they arise from
the movement of our free-will."
I answer that, One thing can be the cause of another in two ways;
directly and indirectly. Indirectly as when an agent is the cause of a
disposition to a certain effect, it is said to be the occasional and
indirect cause of that effect: for instance, we might say that he who
dries the wood is the cause of the wood burning. In this way we must
admit that the devil is the cause of all our sins; because he it was
who instigated the first man to sin, from whose sin there resulted a
proneness to sin in the whole human race: and in this sense we
must take the words of Damascene and Dionysius.
But a thing is said to be the direct cause of something, when its
action tends directly thereunto. And in this way the devil is not the
cause of every sin: for all sins are not committed at the devil's
instigation, but some are due to the free-will and the corruption of
the flesh. For, as Origen says (Peri Archon iii), even if there were no
devil, men would have the desire for food and love and such like
pleasures; with regard to which many disorders may arise unless