Matt. v. 45.

now call you servants, for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth; but I have called you friends,
for all things which I have heard from My Father I have made known." For in that which He
says, "I will not now call you servants," He indicates in the most marked manner that it was Himself
who did originally appoint for men that bondage with respect to God through the law, and then
afterwards conferred upon them freedom. And in that He says, "For the servant knoweth not what
his lord doeth," He points out, by means of His own advent, the ignorance of a people in a servile
condition. But when He terms His disciples "the friends of God," He plainly declares Himself to
be the Word of God, whom Abraham also followed voluntarily and under no compulsion (sine
vinculis), because of the noble nature of his faith, and so became "the friend of God." But the
Word of God did not accept of the friendship of Abraham, as though He stood in need of it, for He
was perfect from the beginning ("Before Abraham was," He says, "I am"), but that He in His
goodness might bestow eternal life upon Abraham himself, inasmuch as the friendship of God
imparts immortality to those who embrace it.

### Chapter XIV.—If God demands obedience from man, if He formed man, called him and
placed him under laws, it was merely for man's welfare; not that God stood in need of man,
but that He graciously conferred upon man His favours in every possible manner.
1. In the beginning, therefore, did God form Adam, not as if He stood in need of man, but that
He might have [some one] upon whom to confer His benefits. For not alone antecedently to Adam,
but also before all creation, the Word glorified His Father, remaining in Him; and was Himself
glorified by the Father, as He did Himself declare, "Father, glorify Thou Me with the glory which
I had with Thee before the world was." Nor did He stand in need of our service when He ordered
us to follow Him; but He thus bestowed salvation upon ourselves. For to follow the Saviour is to
be a partaker of salvation, and to follow light is to receive light. But those who are in light do not
themselves illumine the light, but are illumined and revealed by it: they do certainly contribute
nothing to it, but, receiving the benefit, they are illumined by the light. Thus, also, service [rendered]
to God does indeed profit God nothing, nor has God need of human obedience; but He grants to
those who follow and serve Him life and incorruption and eternal glory, bestowing benefit upon
those who serve [Him], because they do serve Him, and on His followers, because they do follow
Him; but does not receive any benefit from them: for He is rich, perfect, and in need of nothing.
But for this reason does God demand service from men, in order that, since He is good and merciful,
He may benefit those who continue in His service. For, as much as God is in want of nothing, so