SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.4.

in as much as one person's evil is displeasing to another. This
movement may be ruled in accordance with reason, and in
accordance with this movement regulated by reason, the movement
of the lower appetite may be regulated. Hence Augustine says (De
Civ. Dei ix, 5) that "this movement of the mind" (viz. mercy) "obeys
the reason, when mercy is vouchsafed in such a way that justice is
safeguarded, whether we give to the needy or forgive the repentant."
And since it is essential to human virtue that the movements of the
soul should be regulated by reason, as was shown above (FS,
Question 59, Articles 4,5), it follows that mercy is a virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: The words of Sallust are to be understood as
applying to the mercy which is a passion unregulated by reason: for
thus it impedes the counselling of reason, by making it wander from
justice.
Reply to Objection 2: The Philosopher is speaking there of pity and
nemesis, considered, both of them, as passions. They are contrary
to one another on the part of their respective estimation of another's
evils, for which pity grieves, in so far as it esteems someone to
suffer undeservedly, whereas nemesis rejoices, in so far as it
esteems someone to suffer deservedly, and grieves, if things go well
with the undeserving: "both of these are praiseworthy and come
from the same disposition of character" (Rhet. ii, 9). Properly
speaking, however, it is envy which is opposed to pity, as we shall
state further on (Question 36, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 3: Joy and peace add nothing to the aspect of
good which is the object of charity, wherefore they do not require
any other virtue besides charity. But mercy regards a certain special
aspect, namely the misery of the person pitied.
Reply to Objection 4: Mercy, considered as a virtue, is a moral virtue
having relation to the passions, and it is reduced to the mean called
nemesis, because "they both proceed from the same
character" (Rhet. ii, 9). Now the Philosopher proposes these means
not as virtues, but as passions, because, even as passions, they are
praiseworthy. Yet nothing prevents them from proceeding from
some elective habit, in which case they assume the character of a
virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether mercy is the greatest of the virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that mercy is the greatest of the virtues.
For the worship of God seems a most virtuous act. But mercy is
preferred before the worship of God, according to Osee 6:6 and Mt.
12:7: "I have desired mercy and not sacrifice." Therefore mercy is
the greatest virtue.
Objection 2: Further, on the words of 1 Tim. 4:8: "Godliness is
profitable to all things," a gloss says: "The sum total of a Christian's
rule of life consists in mercy and godliness." Now the Christian rule
of life embraces every virtue. Therefore the sum total of all virtues is
contained in mercy.
Objection 3: Further, "Virtue is that which makes its subject good,"
according to the Philosopher. Therefore the more a virtue makes a
man like God, the better is that virtue: since man is the better for
being more like God. Now this is chiefly the result of mercy, since of
God is it said (Ps. 144:9) that "His tender mercies are over all His
works," and (Lk. 6:36) Our Lord said: "Be ye . . . merciful, as your
Father also is merciful." Therefore mercy is the greatest of virtues.
On the contrary, The Apostle after saying (Col. 3:12): "Put ye on . . .
as the elect of God . . . the bowels of mercy," etc., adds (Col. 3:14):
"Above all things have charity." Therefore mercy is not the greatest
of virtues.
I answer that, A virtue may take precedence of others in two ways:
first, in itself; secondly, in comparison with its subject. In itself,
mercy takes precedence of other virtues, for it belongs to mercy to
be bountiful to others, and, what is more, to succor others in their
wants, which pertains chiefly to one who stands above. Hence mercy
is accounted as being proper to God: and therein His omnipotence is
declared to be chiefly manifested [Collect, Tenth Sunday after
Pentecost].
On the other hand, with regard to its subject, mercy is not the
greatest virtue, unless that subject be greater than all others,
surpassed by none and excelling all: since for him that has anyone
above him it is better to be united to that which is above than to
supply the defect of that which is beneath. Hence, as regards man,