On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. 14:13): "Happy are the dead who
die in the Lord."
I answer that, Happiness is twofold; the one is imperfect and is had
in this life; the other is perfect, consisting in the vision of God. Now
it is evident that the body is necessary for the happiness of this life.
For the happiness of this life consists in an operation of the intellect,
either speculative or practical. And the operation of the intellect in
this life cannot be without a phantasm, which is only in a bodily
organ, as was shown in the FP, Question 84, Articles 6,7.
Consequently that happiness which can be had in this life, depends,
in a way, on the body. But as to perfect Happiness, which consists in
the vision of God, some have maintained that it is not possible to the
soul separated from the body; and have said that the souls of saints,
when separated from their bodies, do not attain to that Happiness
until the Day of Judgment, when they will receive their bodies back
again. And this is shown to be false, both by authority and by
reason. By authority, since the Apostle says (2 Cor. 5:6): "While we
are in the body, we are absent from the Lord"; and he points out the
reason of this absence, saying: "For we walk by faith and not by
sight." Now from this it is clear that so long as we walk by faith and
not by sight, bereft of the vision of the Divine Essence, we are not
present to the Lord. But the souls of the saints, separated from their
bodies, are in God's presence; wherefore the text continues: "But we
are confident and have a good will to be absent . . . from the body,
and to be present with the Lord." Whence it is evident that the souls
of the saints, separated from their bodies, "walk by sight," seeing the
Essence of God, wherein is true Happiness.
Again this is made clear by reason. For the intellect needs not the
body, for its operation, save on account of the phantasms, wherein it
looks on the intelligible truth, as stated in the FP, Question 84,
Article 7. Now it is evident that the Divine Essence cannot be seen by
means of phantasms, as stated in the FP, Question 12, Article 3.
Wherefore, since man's perfect Happiness consists in the vision of
the Divine Essence, it does not depend on the body. Consequently,
without the body the soul can be happy.
We must, however, notice that something may belong to a thing's
perfection in two ways. First, as constituting the essence thereof;
thus the soul is necessary for man's perfection. Secondly, as
necessary for its well-being: thus, beauty of body and keenness of
perfection belong to man's perfection. Wherefore though the body

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.6.

does not belong in the first way to the perfection of human
Happiness, yet it does in the second way. For since operation
depends on a thing's nature, the more perfect is the soul in its
nature, the more perfectly it has its proper operation, wherein its
happiness consists. Hence, Augustine, after inquiring (Gen. ad lit.
xii, 35) "whether that perfect Happiness can be ascribed to the souls
of the dead separated from their bodies," answers "that they cannot
see the Unchangeable Substance, as the blessed angels see It;
either for some other more hidden reason, or because they have a
natural desire to rule the body."
Reply to Objection 1: Happiness is the perfection of the soul on the
part of the intellect, in respect of which the soul transcends the
organs of the body; but not according as the soul is the natural form
of the body. Wherefore the soul retains that natural perfection in
respect of which happiness is due to it, though it does not retain that
natural perfection in respect of which it is the form of the body.
Reply to Objection 2: The relation of the soul to being is not the
same as that of other parts: for the being of the whole is not that of
any individual part: wherefore, either the part ceases altogether to
be, when the whole is destroyed, just as the parts of an animal, when
the animal is destroyed; or, if they remain, they have another actual
being, just as a part of a line has another being from that of the
whole line. But the human soul retains the being of the composite
after the destruction of the body: and this because the being of the
form is the same as that of its matter, and this is the being of the
composite. Now the soul subsists in its own being, as stated in the
FP, Question 75, Article 2. It follows, therefore, that after being
separated from the body it has perfect being and that consequently it
can have a perfect operation; although it has not the perfect specific
nature.
Reply to Objection 3: Happiness belongs to man in respect of his
intellect: and, therefore, since the intellect remains, it can have
Happiness. Thus the teeth of an Ethiopian, in respect of which he is
said to be white, can retain their whiteness, even after extraction.
Reply to Objection 4: One thing is hindered by another in two ways.
First, by way of opposition; thus cold hinders the action of heat: and
such a hindrance to operation is repugnant to Happiness. Secondly,
by way of some kind of defect, because, to wit, that which is
hindered has not all that is necessary to make it perfect in every