effect in the gaining of grace and the remission of guilt, when it actually is received. And
sometimes the very instant of baptism is the instant of the bestowal of grace and
the remission of guilt where it was not remitted before. So the keys of the Church work
their effect in some cases before the penitent actually places himself under them,
provided he have the purpose of placing himself under them. But he gains a fuller grace
and a fuller remission, when he actually submits himself to the keys by confessing and
receiving absolution. And the case is quite possible (nihil prohibet) of a person at
confession receiving grace and the forgiveness of the guilt of sin by the power of the
keys in the very instant of absolution [i.e., not before then]. Since then in the very
act of confession and absolution a fuller effect of grace and forgiveness is conferred on
him who by his good purpose had obtained grace and remission already, we clearly see
that by the power of the keys the minister of the Church in absolving remits something
of the temporal punishment which the penitent still continued to owe after his act of
contrition. He binds the penitent by his injunction to pay the rest. The fulfilment of
this injunction is called Satisfaction, which is the third part of Penance, whereby a man
is totally discharged from the debt of punishment, provided he pays the full penalty due.
Further than this, his weakness in spiritual good is cured by his abstaining from evil
things and accustoming himself to good deeds, subduing the flesh by fasting, and
improving his relations with his neighbour by the bestowal of alms upon those
neighbours from whom he had been culpably estranged.
Thus it is clear that the minister of the Church in the use of the keys exercises judicial
functions. But to none is judgement committed except over persons subject to his court.
Hence it is not any and every priest that can absolve any and every subject from sin:

confession receiving grace and forgiveness of the guilt of sin by the power of the keys in
the very instant of absolution," i.e., not before then.

## CHAPTER LXXIII--Of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction
BY dispensation of divine justice, the sickness of the soul, which is sin, sometimes
passes to the body. Such bodily sickness is sometimes conducive to the health
of the soul, where it is borne humbly and patiently and as a penance whereby one may
make satisfaction for sin. Sometimes again sickness injures spiritual well-being by
hindering the exercise of virtues. It was fitting therefore to have a spiritual remedy,
applicable to sin precisely in this connexion of bodily sickness being a consequence of
sin. By this spiritual remedy bodily sickness is sometimes cured, when it is expedient for
salvation. This is the purpose of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, of which St James
speaks (James v, 14, 15). Nor is the Sacrament useless, even though bodily health
does not ensue upon its reception: for it is directed against other consequences of sin,
as proneness to evil and difficulty in doing good, infirmities of soul which have a closer
connexion with sin than bodily infirmity. Negligence, the various occupations of life, and
the shortness of time, prevent a man from perfectly remedying the above defects by
penance. Thus this Sacrament is a wholesome provision for completing the sinner's
cure, delivering him from his debt of temporal punishment, and leaving nothing in him at
the departure of his soul from his body to hinder his reception into glory.
This Sacrament is not to be given to all sick persons, but only to such as seem to be
near to death from sickness. If they recover, this Sacrament may be administered to
them again, if they are again reduced to the like state. For the unction of this Sacrament
is not an unction of consecration, like the unction of Confirmation, the ablution of
Baptism, and certain other unctions, which are never repeated, because the
consecration always remains so long as the thing consecrated lasts: but the anointing in
this Sacramentis for healing, and a healing medicine ought to be given again and again
as often as the sickness recurs.
Though some are in a state near to death without sickness, as are persons condemned
to death, and they would need the spiritual effects of this Sacrament, still this
Sacrament is not to be given to them, but only to the sick, since it is given under the
form of bodily medicine, and bodily medicine is not proper except for one bodily sick.
For in the administration of Sacraments their signification must be observed.
Oil is the special matter of this Sacrament, because it is of efficacy for bodily healing by
mitigation of pains, as water, which washes bodies, is the matter of the Sacrament in
which spiritual cleansing is performed. And as bodily healing must go to the root of the
malady, so this unction is applied to those parts of the body from which the malady of
sin proceeds, as are the organs of sense.
And because through this Sacrament sins are forgiven, and sin is not forgiven except
through grace, clearly grace is conferred in this Sacrament. Nor is a bishop necessary
to give this Sacrament, since the Sacrament does not bestow any excellence of state,
as do those Sacraments in which a bishop is the minister. Since however a great
abundance of grace, proper to effect a perfect cure, is required in this Sacrament, it is
right that many priests should take part in the rite, and that the prayer of the