SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.2.

On the contrary, The Apostle (Rm. 3:27) calls the Old Law the "law of
works" which he contrasts with the "law of faith." Therefore the Old
Law ought not to have contained precepts of faith.
I answer that, A master does not impose laws on others than his
subjects; wherefore the precepts of a law presuppose that everyone
who receives the law is subject to the giver of the law. Now the
primary subjection of man to God is by faith, according to Heb. 11:6:
"He that cometh to God, must believe that He is." Hence faith is
presupposed to the precepts of the Law: for which reason (Ex. 20:2)
that which is of faith, is set down before the legal precepts, in the
words, "I am the Lord thy God, Who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt," and, likewise (Dt. 6:4), the words, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord
thy God is one," precede the recording of the precepts.
Since, however, faith contains many things subordinate to the faith
whereby we believe that God is, which is the first and chief of all
articles of faith, as stated above (Question 1, Articles 1,7), it follows
that, if we presuppose faith in God, whereby man's mind is subjected
to Him, it is possible for precepts to be given about other articles of
faith. Thus Augustine expounding the words: "This is My
commandment" (Jn. 15:12) says (Tract. lxxxiii in Joan.) that we have
received many precepts of faith. In the Old Law, however, the secret
things of faith were not to be set before the people, wherefore,
presupposing their faith in one God, no other precepts of faith were
given in the Old Law.
Reply to Objection 1: Faith is necessary as being the principle of
spiritual life, wherefore it is presupposed before the receiving of the
Law.
Reply to Objection 2: Even then Our Lord both presupposed
something of faith, namely belief in one God, when He said: "You
believe in God," and commanded something, namely, belief in the
Incarnation whereby one Person is God and man. This explanation of
faith belongs to the faith of the New Testament, wherefore He added:
"Believe also in Me."
Reply to Objection 3: The prohibitive precepts regard sins, which
corrupt virtue. Now virtue is corrupted by any particular defect, as
stated above (FS, Question 18, Article 4, ad 3; FS, Question 19,
Article 6, ad 1, Article 7, ad 3). Therefore faith in one God being

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.2.

presupposed, prohibitive precepts had to be given in the Old Law, so
that men might be warned off those particular defects whereby their
faith might be corrupted.
Reply to Objection 4: Confession of faith and the teaching thereof
also presuppose man's submission to God by faith: so that the Old
Law could contain precepts relating to the confession and teaching
of faith, rather than to faith itself.
Reply to Objection 5: In this passage again that faith is presupposed
whereby we believe that God is; hence it begins, "Ye that fear the
Lord," which is not possible without faith. The words which
follow---"believe Him"---must be referred to certain special articles of
faith, chiefly to those things which God promises to them that obey
Him, wherefore the passage concludes---"and your reward shall not
be made void."