For as soon as the tongue has uttered the name of the dancer, immediately the
soul has figured to itself his looks, his hair, his delicate clothing, and himself
more effeminate than all. Another again fans the flame in another way, by
introducing some harlot into the conversation, with her words, and attitudes, and
glances, her languishing looks and twisted locks, the smoothness of her cheeks,
and her painted eyelids. Were you not somewhat affected when I gave this
description? Yet be not ashamed, nor blush, for the very necessity of nature
requires this, and so disposes the soul according as the tendency of what is said
may be. But if, when it is I that speak, you, standing in the church, and at a
distance from these things, were somewhat affected at the hearing, consider how
it is likely that they are disposed, who sit in the theater itself, who are totally free
from dread, who are absent from this venerable and awful assembly, who both
see and hear those things with much shamelessness. "And why then," perhaps
one of those who heed not may say, "if the necessity of nature so disposes the
soul, do you let go that, and blame us?" Because, to be softened when one hears
these things, is nature's work; but to hear them is not a fault of nature, but of
deliberate choice. For so he who meddles with fire must needs be injured, so
wills the weakness of our nature; yet nature does not therefore draw us to the fire
and to the injury thence arising; this can be only from deliberate perversity. I
beseech you, therefore, to remove and correct this fault, that you may not of your
own accord cast yourself down the precipice, nor thrust yourselves into the pits
of wickedness, nor run of yourselves to the blaze, lest we place ourselves in
jeopardy of the fire prepared for the devil. May it come to pass, that we all being
delivered both from this fire and from that, may go to the very bosom of
Abraham, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

Homily 19 on the Gospel of John
John 1:41-42
"He first finds his own brother Simon, and says unto him, We have found the
Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. And he brought him to Jesus."
1. When God in the beginning made man, He did not suffer him to be alone,
but gave him woman for a helpmate, and made them to dwell together, knowing
that great advantage would result from this companionship. What though the
woman did not rightly employ this benefit? Still if any one make himself fully
acquainted with the nature of the matter, he will see, that to the wise great
advantage arises from this dwelling together; not in the cause of wife or husband
only, but if brothers do this, they also shall enjoy the benefit. Wherefore the
Prophet has said, "What is good, what is pleasant, but that brethren should dwell
together?" [Psalm 133:1, Septuagint] And Paul exhorted not to neglect the
assembling of ourselves together. [Hebrews 10:25] In this it is that we differ
from beasts, for this we have built cities, and markets, and houses, that we may
be united one with another, not in the place of our dwelling only, but by the bond
of love. For since our nature came imperfect from Him who made it, and is not
self-sufficient, God, for our advantage, ordained that the want hence existing
should be corrected by the assistance arising from mutual intercourse; so that
what was lacking in one should be supplied by another, and the defective nature
thus be rendered self-sufficient; as, for instance, that though made mortal, it
should by succession for a long time maintain immortality. I might have gone
into this argument at greater length, to show what advantages arise to those who
come together from genuine and pure intercourse with each other: but there is
another thing which presses now, that on account of which we have made these
remarks.