here has mentioned the whole number and so has mentioned no one by name.
On what account then does he this?
They made the slanderous charge that he was singular in his preaching, and
desired to introduce novelty in Christian teaching. Wishing therefore to remove
their suspicion, and to show he had many to support him in his doctrine, he has
associated with himself "the brethren," to show that what he wrote he wrote with
their accord.
"Unto the Churches of Galatia."
Thus it appears, that the flame of error had spread over not one or two cities
merely, but the whole Galatian people. Consider too the grave indignation
contained in the phrase, "unto the Churches of Galatia:" he does not say, "to the
beloved" or "to the sanctified," and this omission of all names of affection or
respect, and this speaking of them as a society merely, without the addition
"Churches of God," for it is simply "Churches of Galatia," is strongly expressive
of deep concern and sorrow. Here at the outset, as well as elsewhere, he attacks
their irregularities, and therefore gives them the name of "Churches," in order to
shame them, and reduce them to unity. For persons split into many parties cannot
properly claim this appellation, for the name of "Church" is a name of harmony
and concord.
"Grace to you and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ."
This he always mentions as indispensible, and in this Epistle to the
Galatians especially; for since they were in danger of falling from grace he prays
that they may recover it again, and since they had come to be at war with God,
he beseeches God to restore them to the same peace.
"God the Father."
Here again is a plain confutation of the heretics, who say that John in the
opening of his Gospel, where he says "the Word was God," used the word [Θεὸς]
without the article, to imply an inferiority in the Son's Godhead; and that Paul,
where he says that the Son was "in the form of God," did not mean the Father,
because the word [Θεὸς] is without the article. For what can they say here,

where Paul says, [ἀ] [πὸ Θεοῦ Πατρος], and not [ἀ] [πὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ]? And it is in
no indulgent mood towards them that he calls God, "Father," but by way of
severe rebuke, and suggestion of the source whence they became sons, for the
honor was vouchsafed to them not through the Law, but through the washing of
regeneration. Thus everywhere, even in his exordium, he scatters traces of the
goodness of God, and we may conceive him speaking thus: O you who were
lately slaves, enemies and aliens, what right have you suddenly acquired to call
God your Father? It was not the Law which conferred upon you this relationship;
why do you therefore desert Him who brought you so near to God, and return to
your tutor?
But the Name of the Son, as well as that of the Father, had been sufficient to
declare to them these blessings. This will appear, if we consider the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ with attention; for it is said, "you shall call His Name Jesus;
for it is He that shall save His people from their sins;" [Matthew 1:21] and the
appellation of "Christ" calls to mind the unction of the Spirit.
Ver. 4. "Who gave himself for our sins."
Thus it appears, that the ministry which He undertook was free and
uncompelled; that He was delivered up by Himself, not by another. Let not
therefore the words of John, "that the Father gave His only-begotten Son" [John
3:16] for us, lead you to derogate from the dignity of the Only-begotten, or to
infer therefrom that He is only human. For the Father is said to have given Him,
not as implying that the Son's ministry was a servile one, but to teach us that it
seemed good to the Father, as Paul too has shown in the immediate context:
"according to the will of our God, and Father." He says not "by the command,"
but "according to the will," for inasmuch as there is an unity of will in the Father
and the Son, that which the Son wills, the Father wills also.
"For our sins," says the Apostle; we had pierced ourselves with ten
thousand evils, and had deserved the gravest punishment; and the Law not only
did not deliver us, but it even condemned us, making sin more manifest, without
the power to release us from it, or to stay the anger of God. But the Son of God