who does not avoid sins from afar, but walks near them, will live in fear, and will
often fall into them. Besides, he who eagerly looks at strange beauties, although
he may not commit adultery, has in so doing entertained lust; and has become
already an adulterer according to the declaration of Christ; [Matthew 5:28] and
often by this very lust he is carried on to the actual sin. Let us then withdraw
ourselves far from sins. Do you wish to live soberly? Avoid not only adultery,
but also the licentious glance! Do you wish to be far removed from foul words?
Avoid not only foul words, but also inordinate laughter, and every kind of lust.
Do you wish to keep far from committing murders? Avoid railing too. Do you
wish to keep aloof from drunkenness? Avoid luxury and sumptuous tables, and
pluck up the vice by the roots.
13. The licentiousness of the tongue is a great snare, and needs a strong
bridle. Therefore also some one says. "His own lips are a powerful snare to a
man, and he is snared by the words of his own mouth." [Proverbs 6:2] Above all
the other members, then, let us control this; let us bridle it; and let us expel from
the mouth railings, and contumelies, and foul and slanderous language, and the
evil habit of oaths. For again our discourse has brought us to the same
exhortation. But I had arranged with your charity, yesterday, that I would say no
more concerning this precept, forasmuch as enough has been said upon it on all
the foregoing days. But what is to become of me? I cannot bear to desist from
this counsel, until I see that you have put it in practice; since Paul also, when he
says to the Galatians, "Henceforth let no man trouble me," [Galatians 6:17]
appears again to have met and addressed them. Such are the paternal bowels;
although they say they will depart, yet they depart not, until they see that their
sons are chastened. Have ye heard today what the prophet speaks to us
concerning oaths; "I lifted up my eyes, and I saw," says he, "and, behold, a flying
sickle, the length thereof twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits; and
he said to me, What do you see? And I said, I see a flying sickle, twenty cubits in
length, and ten cubits in breadth. It shall also enter into the house," says he, "of
every one that swears in my name, and shall remain in the midst, and shall pull

down the stones and the wood." What, forsooth, is this which is here spoken?
And for what reason is it in the form of a "sickle," and that a "flying sickle," that
vengeance is seen to pursue the swearers? In order that you may see that the
judgment is inevitable, and the punishment not to be eluded. For from a flying
sword some one might perchance be able to escape, but from a sickle, falling
upon the neck, and acting in the place of a cord, no one can escape. And when
wings too are added, what further hope is there of safety? But on what account
does it pull down the stones and the wood of the swearer's house? In order that
the ruin may be a correction to all. For since it is necessary that the earth must
hide the swearer when dead; the very sight of his ruined house, now become a
heap, will be an admonition to all who pass by and observe it, not to venture on
the like, lest they suffer the like; and it will be a lasting witness against the sin of
the departed. The sword is not so piercing as the nature of an oath! The sabre is
not so destructive as the stroke of an oath! The swearer, although he seems to
live, is already dead, and has received the fatal blow. And as the man who has
received the halter, before he has gone out of the city and come to the pit, and
seen the executioner standing over him, is dead from the time he passed the
doors of the hall of justice: so also the swearer.
14. All this let us consider, and let us not put our brethren on oath. What do
you, O man? At the sacred table you exact an oath, and where Christ lies slain,
there you slay your own brother. Robbers, indeed, murder on the highways; but
you slay the son in the presence of the mother: committing a murder more
accursed than Cain himself; for he slew his brother in solitude and only with
present death; but you slay your brother in the midst of the church, and that with
the deathless death that is to come! For think you that the church was made for
this purpose, that we might swear? Yea, for this it was made, that we might pray!
Is the Table placed there, that we may make adjurations? It is placed there to this
end, that we may loose sins, not that we may bind them. But you, if you heed
nothing else, reverence at least that book, which you reach forth in putting the
oath; and open the Gospel, which you take in hand when you bid swear; and