satisfaction from you, because you bring disgrace on a form so noble and so
honorable.
We say not these things against all [old persons], nor is our discourse
against old age simply (I am not so mad as that), but against a youthful spirit
bringing dishonor on old age. Nor is it concerning those who are grown old that
we sorrowfully say these things, but concerning those who disgrace the hoary
head.
For the old man is a king, if you will, and more royal than he who wears the
purple, if he master his passions, and keep them under subjection, in the rank of
guards. But if he be dragged about and thrust down from his throne, and become
a slave of the love of money, and vainglory, and personal adornment, and
luxuriousness, and drunkenness, anger, and sensual pleasures, and has his hair
dressed out with oil, and shows an age insulted by his way of life, of what
punishment would not such an one be worthy?
10. But may you not be such, O young men! For not even for you is there
the excuse for sinning. Why so? Because it is possible to be old in youth: just as
there are youths in old age, so also the reverse. For as in the one case the white
hair saves no one, so in the other the black is no impediment. For if it is
disgraceful for the old man to do these things of which I have spoken, much
more than for the young man, yet still the young man is not freed from
accusation. For a young man can have an excuse only, in case he is called to the
management of affairs, when he is still inexperienced, when he needs time and
practice; but no longer when it is necessary to display temperance and courage,
nor yet when it is needful to keep his property.
For it sometimes happens that the young man is blamed more than the old.
For the one needs much service, old age making him feeble: but the other being
able, if he will, to provide for himself, what sort of excuse should he meet with,
when he plunders more than the old, when he remembers injuries, when he is
contemptuous, when he does not stand forward to protect others more than the
old man, when he utters many things unseasonably, when he is insolent, when he

reviles, when he is drunken?
And if in the [matter of] chastity he think that he cannot be impleaded,
consider that here also he has many helps, if he will. For although desire trouble
him more violently than it does the old, yet nevertheless there are many things
which he can do more than an old man, and so charm that wild beast. What are
these things? Labors, readings, watchings through the night, fastings.
11. What then are these things to us (one says) who are not monastics? Do
you say this to me? Say it to Paul, when he says, "Watching with all
perseverance and supplication" [Ephesians 6:18], when he says, "Make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof." [Romans 13:14] For surely he
wrote not these things to solitaries only, but to all that are in cities. For ought the
man who lives in the world to have any advantage over the solitary, save only
the living with a wife? In this point he has allowance, but in others none, but it is
his duty to do all things equally with the solitary.
Moreover the Beatitudes [pronounced] by Christ, were not addressed to
solitaries only: since in that case the whole world would have perished, and we
should be accusing God of cruelty. And if these beatitudes were spoken to
solitaries only, and the secular person cannot fulfill them, yet He permitted
marriage, then He has destroyed all men. For if it be not possible, with marriage,
to perform the duties of solitaries, all things have perished and are destroyed,
and the [functions] of virtue are shut up in a strait.
And, how can marriage be honorable, which so hinders us? What then? It is
possible, yea very possible, even if we have wives, to pursue after virtue, if we
will. How? If having "wives," we "be as though we had none," if we rejoice not
over our "possessions," if we "use the world as not abusing it." [1 Corinthians
7:29-31]
And if any persons have been hindered by marriage state, let them know
that marriage is not the hindrance, but their purpose which made an ill use of
marriage. Since it is not wine which makes drunkenness, but the evil purpose,
and the using it beyond due measure. Use marriage with moderation, and you