edition, in latin, appeared.) The book consists of instructions as to the reformation of one's life by means of prayer and penance. Its style is didactic and eminently practical. Its originality consists in the exactness with which the affective and rational processes involved and required during the selection of, and the total dedication to, a life's reform, are anticipated and provided for. Such precision is the result of a man's acute and repeated reflection upon his own mental processes. And, for Ignatius, such reform is the mainstay of a vigorous life of the spirit. Consequently, the lessons learned at Manresa and imparted through the Exercises are of daily and perennial importance. This may seem exaggerated and is certainly open to misinterpretation. There are aspects of the Exercises which are necessarily transient, applicable at the most to the thirty-day period dedicated to their observance: the intensity of feeling normally produced, the emotional strain, would be unbearable and harmful if unduly protracted. But if evidence were lacking that many of the basic principles and techniques to be found in the Exercises were intended by Ignatius to be the inner framework of a man's whole spiritual life, then the Spiritual Diary is of exceptional importance as decisive proof.

## The technique of decision

The Spiritual Exercises revolve around the central axis of reform. At the heart of the second week is to be found a number of considerations that help the exercitant to reach the decisive point at which he both sees what change is required, and has the strength to accept it. From different angles, appealing to diverse mental factors, Ignatius leads the exercitant to consider the means required (in the meditation on 'Two Standards'), the readiness needed (in the consideration of the 'Three Couples'), and the motive underlying the heroism of the followers of Christ (the 'Three Modes of Humility'). The exercitant must then, in the light of these considerations, try to come to a conclusion. Many might have thought that sufficient had been done: that the exercitant could now be left to find his own way. However, Ignatius still has some important information that can be of immense help. Through the apparent jungle of possible reactions he outlines three paths which he had discovered by personal trial and error. The first is the sort of illumination which admits of no doubt; a pauline conversion, an apostolic vocation. The second and third are much more protracted and complicated. The third, which is explained most fully, is dominated by the notion of the 'reasonable'. Here there are at least two possibilities. First, one can draw up a list of the pros and cons that concern the matter at issue; and, after prayer and particular attention to the purity of one's motivation, one can weigh up the importance of the respective sides. Secondly, a number of considerations may help one withdraw to a certain distance from the problem, and thus study it more objectively (for example, to proceed as if making the deliberation on behalf of someone else). It is quite clear from the Diary that Ignatius, for lack of a pauline illumination, had had recourse to this third way, in its varied forms; but he had not found in it a satisfactory solution to his problem. Consequently he had tried the second way, which is described by the saint himself in the Exercises in words that might have been taken from the Diary: The second, when one receives abundant clearness (asaz claridad 11) and knowledge, through experiencing consolations and desolations, and through experiencing the differentiation (discrecidn) of various spirits. It becomes clear at once that the Spiritual Diary consists of sheets on which Ignatius has noted precisely these 'consolations and desolations', the day-by-day process of diverse 'spirits'. It is essentially a record intended to be maintained during a relatively short period (unlike the normal diary), and it contains references only to occurrences that fall under these headings. Some readers may have been puzzled at the terms introduced in the description of this 'second way'. They have a technical ring about them. The treatment given by the saint to these phenomena, in notes inserted between the meditations of his Exercises, is recognized as masterly, 1~ and is strikingly original in the clarity and precision which he brings to bear upon a problem as ancient as christian sprituality itself. The occurrences involved have been felt by all possessed of spiritual awareness. The problem lies in the extreme delicacy and complexity of these happenings, and the difficulty of communicating with others on topics so remote from every-day reality. The distinctive feature of each is the satisfaction or dissatisfaction which is felt and recognized in protracted reflection. This process of reflection requires sensitivity; but it must be backed by firmness and decision. The good and evil spirits utilize both periods (satisfaction and dissatisfaction); though the good tend to lead us to the former state. Within each state, the different spirits can still produce varied movements and agitations. One of the finest portraits in the world's spiritual writings of both these states and the actions of the different spirits is the Spiritual Diary. Satisfaction has been mentioned as the key-note of periods of consolation: but as the saint makes clear in the Exercises, there are different levels of