doubtless He who was able not to die, if He would not, did die because He
would: and so He made a show of principalities and powers, openly
triumphing over them in Himself.3 For whereas by His death the one and
most real sacrifice was offered up for us, whatever fault there was,
whence principalities and powers held us fast as of right to pay its
penalty, He cleansed, abolished, extinguished; and by His own
resurrection He also called us whom He predestinated to a new life; and
whom He called, them He justified; and whom He justified, them He
glorified. And so the devil, in that very death of the flesh, lost man, whom
he was possessing as by an absolute right, seduced as he was by his own
consent, and over whom he ruled, himself impeded by no corruption of
flesh and blood, through that frailty of man's mortal body, whence he was
both too poor and too weak; he who was proud in proportion as he was,
as it were, both richer and stronger, ruling over him who was, as it were,
both clothed in rags and full of troubles. For whither he drove the sinner
to fall, himself not following, there by following he compelled the
Redeemer to descend. And so the Son of God deigned to become our
friend in the fellowship of death, to which because he came not, the
enemy thought himself to be better and greater than ourselves. For our
Redeemer says, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down
his life for his friends." Wherefore also the devil thought himself
superior to the Lord Himself, inasmuch as the Lord in His sufferings
yielded to him; for of Him, too, is understood what is read in the Psalm,
"For Thou hast made Him a little lower than the angels:" so that He,
being Himself put to death, although innocent, by the unjust one acting
against us as it were by just right, might by a most just right overcome
him, and so might lead captive the captivity wrought through sin,7 and
free us from a captivity that was just on account of sin, by blotting out the
handwriting, and redeeming us who were to be justified although sinners,
through His own righteous blood unrighteously poured out.
18. Hence also the devil mocks those who are his own until this very day,
to whom he presents himself as a false mediator, as though they would be
cleansed or rather entangled and drowned by his rites, in that he very
easily persuades the proud to ridicule and despise the death of Christ,
from which the more he himself is estranged, the more is he believed by
them to be the holier and more divine. Yet those who have remained with

him are very few, since the nations acknowledge and with pious humility
imbibe the price paid for themselves, and in trust upon it abandon their
enemy, and gather together to their Redeemer. For the devil does not
know how the most excellent wisdom of God makes use of both his snares
and his fury to bring about the salvation of His own faithful ones,
beginning from the former end, which is the beginning of the spiritual
creature, even to the latter end, which is the death of the body, and so
"reaching from the one end to the other, mightily and sweetly ordering all
things." For wisdom "passeth and goeth through all things by reason of
her pureness, and no defiled thing can fall into her." And since the devil
has nothing to do with the death of the flesh; whence comes his exceeding
pride, a death of another kind is prepared in the eternal fire of hell, by
which not only the spirits that have earthly, but also those who have
aerial bodies, can be tormented. But proud men, by whom Christ is
despised, because He died, wherein He bought us with so great a price,
both bring back the former death, and also men, to that miserable
condition of nature, which is derived from the first sin, and will be cast
down into the latter death with the devil. And they on this account
preferred the devil to Christ, because the former cast them into that
former death, whither he himself fell not through the difference of his
nature, and whither on account of them Christ descended through His
great mercy: and yet they do not hesitate to believe themselves better
than the devils, and do not cease to assail and denounce them with every
sort of malediction, while they know them at any rate to have nothing to
do with the suffering of this kind of death, on account of which they
despise Christ. Neither will they take into account that the case may
possibly be, that the Word of God, remaining in Himself, and in Himself
in no way changeable, may yet, through the taking upon Him of a lower
nature, be able to suffer somewhat of a lower kind, which the unclean
spirit cannot suffer, because he has not an earthly body. And so, whereas
they themselves are better than the devils, yet, because they bear a body
of flesh, they can so die, as the devils certainly cannot die, who do not
bear such a body. They presume much on the deaths of their own
sacrifices, which they do not perceive that they sacrifice to deceitful and
proud spirits; or if they have come to perceive it, think their friendship to
be of some good to themselves, treacherous and envious although they
are, whose purpose is bent upon nothing else except to hinder our return.