not such as this.
9. Thus, in the case of material leaven, the unleavened might become
leavened, but never the reverse; whereas here there is a chance of the direct
contrary occuring. This however he has not plainly declared: and observe his
good sense. In the former Epistle he gives the fornicator no hope of return, but
orders that his whole life should be spent in repentance, lest he should make him
less energetic through the promise. For he said not, "Deliver him up to Satan,"
that having repented he might be commended again unto the Church. But what
says he? "That he may be saved in the last day." For he conducts him on unto
that time in order to make him full of anxiety. And what favors he intended him
after the repentance, he reveals not, imitating his own Master. For as God says,
[Jonah 3:4. Septuagint: rec. text, "forty days."] "Yet three days, and Nineveh
shall be overthrown," and added not, "but if she repent she shall be saved:" so
also he did not say here, "But if he repent worthily, we will 'confirm our love
towards him.'" [2 Corinthians 2:8]. But he waits for him to do the work that so
he may then receive the favor. For if he had said this at the beginning he might
have set him free from the fear. Wherefore he not only does not so, but by the
instance of leaven allows him not even a hope of return, but reserves him unto
that day: "Purge out (so he says) the old leaven;" and, "let us not keep the feast
with old leaven." But as soon as he had repented, he brought him in again with
all earnestness.
10. But why does he call it "old?" Either because our former life was of this
sort, or because that which is old is "ready to vanish away," [Hebrews 8:13] and
is unsavory and foul; which is the nature of sin. For He neither simply finds fault
with the old, nor simply praises the new, but with reference to the subject matter.
And thus elsewhere He says, [Sirach 9:15] "New wine is as a new friend: but if it
become old, then with pleasure shall you drink it:" in the case of friendship
bestowing his praise rather upon the old than the new. And again, "The Ancient
of days sat," [Daniel 7:9] here again, taking the term "ancient" as among those
laudatory expressions which confer highest glory. Elsewhere the Scripture takes

the term "old" in the sense of blame; for seeing that the things are of various
aspect as being composed of many parts, it uses the same words both in a good
and an evil import, not according to the same shade of meaning. Of which you
may see an instance in the blame cast elsewhere on the old: [Psalm 17:46. ap.
Septuagint] "They waxed old, and they halted from their paths." And again,
[Psalm 6:7. ap. Septuagint] "I have become old in the midst of all mine enemies."
And again, [Daniel 13:52. Hist. Susan] "O you that are become old in evil days."
So also the "Leaven" is often taken for the kingdom of Heaven, although here
found fault with. But in that place it is used with one aspect, and in this with
another.
11. But I have a strong conviction that the saying about the leaven refers
also to the priests who suffer a vast deal of the old leaven to be within, not
purging out from their borders, that is, out of the Church, the covetous, the
extortioners, and whatsoever would exclude from the kingdom of Heaven. For
surely covetousness is an "old leaven;" and whenever it lights and into
whatsoever house it enters, makes it unclean: and though you may gain but little
by your injustice, it leavens the whole of your substance. Wherefore not seldom
the dishonest gain being little, has cast out the stock honestly laid up however
abundant. For nothing is more rotten than covetousness. You may fasten up that
man's closet with key, and door, and bolt: you do all in vain, while you shut up
within covetousness, the worst of robbers, and able to carry off all.
"But what," say you, "if there are many covetous who do not experience
this?" In the first place, they will experience it, though their experience come not
immediately. And should they now escape, then fear it the more: for they are
reserved for greater punishment. Add to this, that in the event of themselves
escaping, yet those who inherit their wealth will have the same to endure. "But
how can this be just," you will say? It is quite just. For he that has succeeded to
an inheritance; full of injustice, though he have committed no rapine himself,
detains nevertheless the property of others; and is perfectly aware of this; and it
is fair he should suffer for it. For if this or that person had robbed and you