expulsion from the life of Paradise had, compare what Eve was before this, and
what she became afterwards. Before this indeed, she considered that deceiving
Devil, that wicked Demon to be more worth believing than the commandments
of God, and at the mere sight of the tree, she trampled under foot the law which
had been laid down by Him. But when the expulsion from Paradise came,
consider how much better and wiser she grew. For when she bare a son, she says
"I have gotten a man through the Lord." She straightway flew to the master, who
before this had despised the master, and she neither ascribes the matter to nature,
nor puts the birth down to the laws of marriage, but she recognizes the Lord of
Nature, and acknowledges thanks to Him for the birth of the little child. And she
who before this deceived her husband, afterwards even trained the little child,
and gave him a name which of itself was able to bring the gift of God to her
remembrance: and again when she bare another, she says "God has raised up
seed to me in place of Abel whom Cain slew." The woman remembers her
calamity, and does not become impatient but she gives thanks to God, and calls
the little child after his gift, furnishing it with constant material for instruction.
Thus even in his very deprivation God conferred greater benefit. The woman
suffered expulsion from Paradise, but by means of her ejection she was led to a
knowledge of God, so that she found a greater thing than she lost. And if it were
profitable, says one, to suffer expulsion from Paradise, for what cause did God
give Paradise at the beginning? This turned out profitably to man, on account of
our carelessness, since, if at least, they had taken heed to themselves, and had
acknowledged their master, and had known how to be self-restrained, and to
keep within bounds, they would have remained in honour. But when they treated
the gifts which had been given them with insolence, then it became profitable,
that they should be ejected. For what cause then did God give at first? In order
that he might show forth his own lovingkindness, and because He himself was
prepared to bring us even to greater honour. But we were the cause of
chastisement and punishment on all sides, ejecting ourselves through our
indifference to goods which were given to us. Just as therefore an affectionate

father, at first indeed, suffers his own son to dwell in his home, and to enjoy all
his father's goods, but when he sees that he has become worthless of the honour,
he leads him away from his table, and puts him far from his own sight, and often
casts him forth from his paternal home, in order that he, suffering expulsion, and
becoming better by this slight and this dishonour, may again show himself
worthy of restoration, and may succeed to his father's inheritance: So has God
done. He gave Paradise to man. He cast him out when he appeared unworthy, in
order that by his dwelling outside, and through his dishonour, he might become
better, and more self-restrained, and might appear worthy again of restoration.
Since after those things he did become better, he brings him back again and says
"Today shall you be with me in Paradise." Do you see that not the gift of
Paradise but even the ejection from Paradise was a token of the greatest tender
care? For had he not suffered expulsion from Paradise, he would not again have
appeared worthy of Paradise.
4. This argument therefore let us maintain throughout, and let us apply it to
the case of the subject lying before us. God gave a speech common to all. This is
part of his loving kindness to men. They did not use the gift rightly, but they
lapsed to utter folly. He took away again that which had been given. For if when
they had one speech, they fell into so great folly, as to wish to build a tower to
heaven: had they not immediately been chastised would they not have desired to
lay hold on the height of heaven itself? For why? If indeed that were impossible
for them, yet notwithstanding their impious thoughts are made out from their
plan. All which things God foresaw, and since they did not use their oneness of
speech rightly, he rightly divided them by difference of speech. And see with
me, his lovingkindness. "Behold," says he "they all have one speech, and this
they have begun to do."
For what reason did he not at once proceed to the division of tongues, but
first of all defend himself, as if about to be judged in a lawcourt? And yet at least
no one can say to him, why have you done this? Yea he is at liberty to do all
things as he wills. But still as one about to give account, he thus sets up a