without an object. The controversy, consequently, is as much between the
deist and the psychologist, as it is between him and the trinitarian. It is as
much a question whether his view of personality and self-consciousness
is correct, as whether his interpretation of Scripture is. For the dispute
involves the necessary conditions of personality. If a true psychology does
not require trinality in a spiritual essence in order to its own selfcontemplation, and self-knowledge, and self-communion, then the deist
is correct; but if it does, then he is in error. That the study of selfconsciousness in modern metaphysics has favored trinitarianism, is
unquestionable. Even the spurious trinitarianism which has grown up in
the schools of the later pantheism goes to show, that a trinal constitution
is requisite in an essence, in order to explain self-consciousness, and that
absolute singleness, or the absence of all interior distinctions, renders the
problem insoluble.
But the authority of Scripture is higher than that of psychology, and
settles the matter. Revelation unquestionably discloses a deity who is
"blessed forever;" whose blessedness is independent of the universe
which he has made from nonentity, and who must therefore find all the
conditions of blessedness within himself alone. He is blessed from
eternity, in his own self-contemplation and self-communion. He does not
need the universe in order that he may have an object which he can know,
which he can love, and over which he can rejoice. "The Father knoweth
the Son," from all eternity (Matt. 11:27); and "loveth the Son," from all
eternity (John 3:35); and "glorifieth the Son," from all eternity (John
17:5). Prior to creation, the Eternal Wisdom "was by Him as one brought
up with Him, and was daily His delight, rejoicing always before Him"
(Prov. 8:30); and the Eternal Word "was in the beginning with God"
(John 1:2); and "the Only Begotten Son (or God Only Begotten, as the
uncials read) was eternally in the bosom of the Father" (John 1:18).
Here is society within the Essence, and wholly independent of the
universe; and communion and blessedness resulting therefrom. But this
is impossible to an essence without personal distinctions. Not the
singular Unit of the deist, but the plural Unity of the trinitarian, explains
this. A subject without an object could not know. What is there to be
known? Could not love. What is there to be loved? Could not rejoice.

What is there to rejoice over? And the object cannot be the universe. The
infinite and eternal object of God's infinite and eternal knowledge, love,
and joy, cannot be his creation: because this is neither eternal, nor
infinite. There was a time when the universe was not; and if God's selfconsciousness and blessedness depends upon the universe, there was a
time when God was neither self-conscious nor blessed. The objective God
for the subjective God must, therefore, be very God of very God, begotten
not made, the eternal Son of the eternal Father.
The same line of reasoning applies to the third trinitarian person, but
there is no need of going through with it. The history of opinion shows,
that if the first two eternal distinctions are conceded, there is no denial of
the reality and eternity of the third.
The analogue derived from the nature of finite personality and selfconsciousness has one great advantage—namely, that it illustrates the
independence of the Divine personality and self-consciousness. The later
pantheism (not the earlier of Spinoza) constructs a kind of trinity, but it is
dependent upon the universe. God distinguishes Himself from the world,
and thereby finds the object required for the subject. But this implies
either that the world is eternal, or else, that God is not eternally selfconscious. The Christian trinitarianism, on the contrary, finds all the
media and conditions of self-consciousness within the Divine Essence.
God distinguishes himself from himself, not from the universe. The
eternal Father beholds himself in the eternal Son, his alter ego, the
"express image of his own person" (Heb. 1:3). God does not struggle
gradually into self-consciousness, as in the Hegelian scheme, by the help
of the universe. Before that universe was in existence, and in the solitude
of his own eternity and self-sufficiency, he had within his own essence all
the media and conditions of self-consciousness. And after the worlds
were called into being, the Divine personality remained the same
immutable and infinite self-knowledge, unaffected by anything in his
handiwork.
"O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that dwellest,
Sole knowest thyself, and known unto thyself,