we refer in the words, "Deliver us from evil."
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii,
5), when we say, "Hallowed be Thy name, we do not mean that God's
name is not holy, but we ask that men may treat it as a holy thing,"
and this pertains to the diffusion of God's glory among men. When
we say, "Thy kingdom come, we do not imply that God is not
reigning now," but "we excite in ourselves the desire for that
kingdom, that it may come to us, and that we may reign therein," as
Augustine says (ad Probam, Ep. cxxx, 11). The words, "Thy will be
done rightly signify, 'May Thy commandments be obeyed' on earth
as in heaven, i.e. by men as well as by angels" (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte ii, 6). Hence these three petitions will be perfectly fulfilled in
the life to come; while the other four, according to Augustine
(Enchiridion cxv), belong to the needs of the present life
Reply to Objection 2: Since prayer is the interpreter of desire, the
order of the petitions corresponds with the order, not of execution,
but of desire or intention, where the end precedes the things that are
directed to the end, and attainment of good precedes removal of evil.
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 11)
adapts the seven petitions to the gifts and beatitudes. He says: "If it
is fear God whereby blessed are the poor in spirit, let us ask that
God's name be hallowed among men with a chaste fear. If it is piety
whereby blessed are the meek, let us ask that His kingdom may
come, so that we become meek and no longer resist Him. If it is
knowledge whereby blessed are they that mourn, let us pray that His
will be done, for thus we shall mourn no more. If it is fortitude
whereby blessed ere they that hunger, let us pray that our daily
bread be given to us. If it is counsel whereby blessed are the
merciful, let us forgive the trespasses of others that our own may be
forgiven. If it is understanding whereby blessed are the pure in heart,
let us pray lest we have a double heart by seeking after worldly
things which ere the occasion of our temptations. If it is wisdom
whereby blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called the
children of God, let us pray to be delivered from evil: for if we be
delivered we shall by that very fact become the free children of God."
Reply to Objection 4: According to Augustine (Enchiridion cxvi),
"Luke included not seven but five petitions in the Lord's Prayer, for
by omitting it, he shows that the third petition is a kind of repetition
of the two that precede, and thus helps us to understand it";

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.10.

because, to wit, the will of God tends chiefly to this---that we come to
the knowledge of His holiness and to reign together with Him. Again
the last petition mentioned by Matthew, "Deliver us from evil," is
omitted by Luke, so that each one may know himself to be delivered
from evil if he be not led into temptation.
Reply to Objection 5: Prayer is offered up to God, not that we may
bend Him, but that we may excite in ourselves the confidence to ask:
which confidence is excited in us chiefly by the consideration of His
charity in our regard, whereby he wills our good---wherefore we say:
"Our Father"; and of His excellence, whereby He is able to fulfil it--wherefore we say: "Who art in heaven."