of one Body with Him, and counted for His Flesh, and even as a Body with the
Head, so were we united unto Him! All these things then Paul calls a
"superabundance" of grace, showing that what we received was not a medicine
only to countervail the wound, but even health, and comeliness, and honor, and
glory and dignities far transcending our natural state. And of these each in itself
was enough to do away with death, but when all manifestly run together in one,
there is not the least vestige of it left, nor can a shadow of it be seen, so entirely
is it done away. As then if any one were to cast a person who owed ten mites ([ὀ]
[βόλους]) into prison, and not the man himself only, but wife and children and
servants for his sake; and another were to come and not to pay down the ten
mites only, but to give also ten thousand talents of gold, and to lead the prisoner
into the king's courts, and to the throne of the highest power, and were to make
him partaker of the highest honor and every kind of magnificence, the creditor
would not be able to remember the ten mites; so has our case been. For Christ
has paid down far more than we owe, yea as much more as the illimitable ocean
is than a little drop. Do not then, O man, hesitate as you see so great a store of
blessings, nor enquire how that mere spark of death and sin was done away,
when such a sea of gifts was brought in upon it. For this is what Paul intimated
by saying that "they who have received the abundance of the grace and
righteousness shall reign in life." And as he had now clearly demonstrated this,
he again makes use of his former argument, clenching it by taking up the same
word afresh, and saying that if for that offense all were punished, then they may
be justified too by these means. And so he says,
Ver. 18. "Therefore as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of One the free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life."
And he insists again upon it, saying,
Ver. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of One shall many be made righteous.
What he says seems indeed to involve no small question: but if any one

attends to it diligently, this too will admit of an easy solution. What then is the
question? It is the saying that through the offense of one many were made
sinners. For the fact that when he had sinned and become mortal, those who
were of him should be so also, is nothing unlikely. But how would it follow that
from his disobedience another would become a sinner? For at this rate a man of
this sort will not even deserve punishment, if, that is, it was not from his own
self that he became a sinner. What then does the word "sinners" mean here? To
me it seems to mean liable to punishment and condemned to death. Now that by
Adam's death we all became mortals, he had shown clearly and at large. But the
question now is, for what purpose was this done? But this he does not go on to
add: for it contributed nothing to his present object. For it is against a Jew that
the contest is, who doubted and made scorn of the righteousness by One. And for
this reason after showing that the punishment too was brought in by one upon
all, the reason why this was so he has not added. For he is not for superfluities,
but keeps merely to what is necessary. For this is what the principles of
disputation did not oblige him to say any more than the Jew; and therefore he
leaves it unsolved. But if any of you were to enquire with a view to learn, we
should give this answer: That we are so far from taking any harm from this death
and condemnation , if we be sober-minded, that we are the gainers even by
having become mortal, first, because it is not an immortal body in which we sin;
secondly, because we get numberless grounds for being religious ([φιλοσοφίας]).
For to be moderate, and to be temperate, and to be subdued, and to keep
ourselves clear of all wickedness, is what death by its presence and by its being
expected persuades us to. But following with these, or rather even before these,
it has introduced other greater blessings besides. For it is from hence that the
crowns of the martyrs come, and the rewards of the Apostles. Thus was Abel
justified, thus was Abraham, in having slain his son, thus was John, who for
Christ's sake was taken off, thus were the Three Children, thus was Daniel. For if
we be so minded, not death only, but even the devil himself will be unable to
hurt us. And besides there is this also to be said, that immortality awaits us, and