knowledge; because the being of things flows from the Word, as
from a kind of primordial principle; and this flow is terminated in the
being which they have in themselves.
Reply to Objection 1: Evening and morning knowledge in the angelic
knowledge are not taken as compared to an admixture of darkness,
but as compared to beginning and end. Or else it can be said, as
Augustine puts it (Gen. ad lit. iv, 23), that there is nothing to prevent
us from calling something light in comparison with one thing, and
darkness with respect to another. In the same way the life of the
faithful and the just is called light in comparison with the wicked,
according to Eph. 5:8: "You were heretofore darkness; but now, light
in the Lord": yet this very life of the faithful, when set in contrast to
the life of glory, is termed darkness, according to 2 Pt. 1:19: "You
have the firm prophetic word, whereunto you do well to attend, as to
a light that shineth in a dark place." So the angel's knowledge by
which he knows things in their own nature, is day in comparison
with ignorance or error; yet it is dark in comparison with the vision
of the Word.
Reply to Objection 2: The morning and evening knowledge belong to
the day, that is, to the enlightened angels, who are quite apart from
the darkness, that is, from the evil spirits. The good angels, while
knowing the creature, do not adhere to it, for that would be to turn to
darkness and to night; but they refer this back to the praise of God,
in Whom, as in their principle, they know all things. Consequently
after "evening" there is no night, but "morning"; so that morning is
the end of the preceding day, and the beginning of the following, in
so far as the angels refer to God's praise their knowledge of the
preceding work. Noonday is comprised under the name of day, as
the middle between the two extremes. Or else the noon can be
referred to their knowledge of God Himself, Who has neither
beginning nor end.
Reply to Objection 3: The angels themselves are also creatures.
Accordingly the existence of things in the angelic knowledge is
comprised under evening knowledge, as also the existence of things
in their own nature.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the morning and evening knowledge are

one?
Objection 1: It would seem that the morning and the evening
knowledge are one. For it is said (Gn. 1:5): "There was evening and
morning, one day." But by the expression "day" the knowledge of
the angels is to be understood, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iv,
23). Therefore the morning and evening knowledge of the angels are
one and the same.
Objection 2: Further, it is impossible for one faculty to have two
operations at the same time. But the angels are always using their
morning knowledge; because they are always beholding God and
things in God, according to Mt. 18:10. Therefore, if the evening
knowledge were different from the morning, the angel could never
exercise his evening knowledge.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:10): "When that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done
away." But, if the evening knowledge be different from the morning,
it is compared to it as the less perfect to the perfect. Therefore the
evening knowledge cannot exist together with the morning
knowledge.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iv, 24): "There is a vast
difference between knowing anything as it is in the Word of God, and
as it is in its own nature; so that the former belongs to the day, and
the latter to the evening."
I answer that, As was observed (Article 6), the evening knowledge is
that by which the angels know things in their proper nature. This
cannot be understood as if they drew their knowledge from the
proper nature of things, so that the preposition "in" denotes the form
of a principle; because, as has been already stated (Question 55,
Article 2), the angels do not draw their knowledge from things. It
follows, then, that when we say "in their proper nature" we refer to
the aspect of the thing known in so far as it is an object of
knowledge; that is to say, that the evening knowledge is in the
angels in so far as they know the being of things which those things
have in their own nature.