by not being turned back even by the hour, for the sun was already near its
setting, ("it was," says John, "about the tenth hour.") And therefore Christ does
not tell them the marks of His abode, nor its situation, but rather induces them to
follow Him by showing them that He had accepted them. For this reason He did
not say anything of this kind to them, "It is an unseasonable time now for you to
enter into the house, tomorrow you shall hear if you have any wish, return home
now"; but converses with them as with friends, and those who had long been
with Him.
How then says He in another place, "But the Son of Man has not where to
lay His head" [Luke 9:58], while here He says, "Come and see" [John 1:39]
where I abide? Because the expression "has not where to lay His head," signifies
that He had no dwelling place of His own, not that He did not abide in a house.
And this too is the meaning of the comparison. The Evangelist has mentioned
that "they abode with Him that day," but has not added wherefore, because the
reason was plain; for from no other motive did they follow Christ, and He draw
them to Him, but only that they might have instruction; and this they enjoyed so
abundantly and eagerly even in a single night, that they both proceeded
straightway to the capture of others.
4. Let us then also learn hence to consider all things secondary to the
hearing the word of God, and to deem no season unseasonable, and, though a
man may even have to go into another person's house, and being a person
unknown to make himself known to great men, though it be late in the day, or at
any time whatever, never to neglect this traffic. Let food and baths and dinners
and the other things of this life have their appointed time; but let the teaching of
heavenly philosophy have no separate time, let every season belong to it. For
Paul says, "In season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort" [2 Timothy 4:2];
and the Prophet too says, "In His law will he meditate day and night" [Psalm
1:3]; and Moses commanded the Jews to do this always. For the things of this
life, baths, I mean, and dinners, even if they are necessary, yet being continually
repeated, render the body feeble; but the teaching of the soul the more it is

prolonged, the stronger it renders the soul which receives it. But now we portion
out all our time for trifles and unprofitable silly talking, and we sit together idly
during the morning and afternoon, midday and evening besides, and we have
appointed places for this; but hearing the divine doctrines twice or thrice in the
week we become sick, and thoroughly sated. What is the reason? We are in a bad
state of soul; its faculty of desiring and reaching after these things we have
relaxed altogether. And therefore it is not strong enough to have an appetite for
spiritual food. And this among others is a great proof of weakness, not to hunger
nor thirst, but to be disinclined to both. Now if this, when it takes place in our
bodies, is a sure sign of grievous disease, and productive of weakness, much
more is it so in the soul.
"How then," says one, "shall we be able to renew it, thus fallen and relaxed,
to strength? What doing, what saying?" By applying ourselves to the divine
words of the prophets, of the Apostles, of the Gospels, and all the others; then
we shall know that it is far better to feed on these than on impure food, for so we
must term our unseasonable idle talking and assemblies. For which is best, tell
me, to converse on things relating to the market, or things in the law courts, or in
the camp, or on things in heaven, and on what shall be after our departure hence?
Which is best, to talk about our neighbor and our neighbor's affairs, to busy
ourselves in what belongs to other people, or to enquire into the things of angels,
and into matters which concern ourselves? For a neighbor's affairs are not yours
at all; but heavenly things are yours. "But," says some one, "a man may by once
speaking finish these subjects altogether." Why do you not think this in matters
on which you converse uselessly and idly, why though you waste your lives on
this have you never exhausted the subject? And I have not yet named what is far
more vile than this. These are the things about which the better sort converse one
with the other; but the more indifferent and careless carry about in their talk
players and dancers and charioteers, defiling men's ears, corrupting their souls,
and driving their nature into mad excesses by these narratives, and by means of
this discourse introducing every kind of wickedness into their own imagination.