end. So that, if we cut out and burn the thorns, we shall be able to enjoy those
good things innumerable and to become approved, and to partake of blessing.
And with good reason did he call sin "a thistle," saying "that which bears
thorns and thistles"; for on whatever side you lay hold on it, it wounds and
stings, and it is unpleasant even to look at.
4. Having therefore sufficiently rebuked them, and alarmed and wounded
them, he in turn heals them, so as not to cast them down too much, and make
them supine. For he that strikes one that is "dull," makes him more dull. So then
he neither flatters them throughout, lest he should make them supine, nor does
he wound them throughout, but having inserted a little to wound them, he
applies much to heal in what follows.
For what does he say? We speak not these things, as having condemned
you, nor as thinking you to be full of thorns, but fearing lest this should come to
pass. For it is better to terrify you by words, that you may not suffer by the
realities. And this is specially of Paul's wisdom.

Hebrews 6:9
Moreover he did not say, We think, or, we conjecture, or, we expect, or, we
hope, but what? [Hebrews 6:9] "But beloved, we are persuaded better things of
you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak." Which word
he also used in writing to the Galatians: "But I am persuaded of you in the Lord,
that you will be none otherwise minded." [Galatians 5:10] For in that instance,
inasmuch as they were greatly to be condemned, and he could not praise them
from things present, he does it from things future ("that you will be none
otherwise minded," he says): he said not, you are, but "ye will be none otherwise
minded." But here he encourages them from things present. "We are persuaded
better things of you, beloved, and things that accompany to salvation, though we
thus speak." And since he was not able to say so much from things present, he
confirms his consolation from things past; and says,

Hebrews 6:10
"For God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and the love, which you
have showed toward His name, in that you have ministered unto the saints and
do minister." O how did he here restore their spirit, and give them fresh strength,
by reminding them of former things, and bringing them to the necessity of not
supposing that God had forgotten. (For he cannot but sin who is not fully assured
concerning his hope, and says that God is unrighteous. Accordingly he obliged
them by all means to look forward to those future things. For one who despairs
of present things, and has given up exerting himself, may be restored by [the
prospect of] things future.) As he himself also said in writing to the Galatians,
"You did run well" [Galatians 5:7]: and again, "Have ye suffered so many things
in vain? If it be yet in vain." [Galatians 3:4]
And as in this place he puts the praise with the reproof, saying, "When for
the time ye ought to be teachers" [Hebrews 5:12], so also there, "I marvel that
you are so soon removed." [Galatians 1:6] With the reproof is the praise. For
respecting great things we marvel, when they fail. You see that praise is
concealed under the accusation and the blame. Nor does he say this concerning
himself only, but also concerning all. For he said not, I am persuaded, but "we
are persuaded better things of you," even good things (he means). He says this
either in regard to matters of conduct, or to the recompense. In the next place,
having said above, that it is "rejected and near unto a curse," and that it "shall
be for burning," he says, we do not by any means speak this of you. "For God is
not unrighteous to forget your work, and love." [Hebrews 6:10]