1 Corinthians 4:16
5. "I beseech you, be imitators of me, as I also am of Christ." [κάθως κὰγὼ
Χριστοῦ], omitted in our version: the Vulgate has it, see 1 Corinthians 11:1
Astonishing! How great is our teacher's boldness of speech! How highly finished
the image, when he can even exhort others hereunto! Not that in self-exaltation
he does so, but implying that virtue is an easy thing. As if he had said, "Tell me
not, 'I am not able to imitate you. You are a Teacher, and a great one.' For the
difference between me and you is not so great as between Christ and me: and yet
I have imitated Him."
On the other hand, writing to the Ephesians, he interposes no mention of
himself, but leads them all straight to the one point, "Be imitators of God," is his
word. [Ephesians 5:1] But in this place, since his discourse was addressed to
weak persons, he puts himself in by the way.
And besides, too, he signifies that it is possible even thus to imitate Christ.
For he who copies the perfect impression of the seal, copies the original model.
Let us see then in what way he followed Christ: for this imitation needs not
time and art, but a steady purpose alone. Thus if we go into the study of a
painter, we shall not be able to copy the portrait, though we see it ten thousand
times. But to copy him we are enabled by hearing alone. Will ye then that we
bring the tablet before you and sketch out for you Paul's manner of life? Well, let
it be produced, that picture far brighter than all the images of Emperors: for its
material is not boards glued together, nor canvass stretched out; but the material
is the work of God: being as it is a soul and a body: a soul, the work of God, not
of men; and a body again in like wise.
Did you utter applause here? Nay, not here is the time for plaudits; but in
what follows: for applauding, I say, and for imitating too: for so far we have but
the material which is common to all without exception: inasmuch as soul differs

not from soul in regard of its being a soul: but the purpose of heart shows the
difference. For as one body differs not from another in so far as it is a body, but
Paul's body is like every one's else, only dangers make one body more brilliant
than another: just so is it in the case of the soul also.
6. Suppose then our tablet to be the soul of Paul: this tablet was lately lying
covered with soot, full of spider's webs; (for nothing can be worse than
blasphemy;) but when He came who transforms all things, and saw that not
through indolence or sluggishness were his lines so drawn but through
inexperience and his not having the tints ([τὰ ἄνθη]) of true piety: (for zeal
indeed he had, but the colors were not there; for he had not "the zeal according
to knowledge:") He gives him the tint of the truth, that is, grace: and in a
moment he exhibited the imperial image. For having got the colors and learned
what he was ignorant of, he waited no time, but immediately appeared a most
excellent artist. And first he shows the head of the king, preaching Christ; then
also the remainder of the body; the body of a perfect Christian life. Now painters
we know shut themselves up and execute all their works with great nicety and in
quiet; not opening the doors to any one: but this man, setting forth his tablet in
the view of the world, in the midst of universal opposition, clamor, disturbance,
did under such circumstances work out this Royal Image, and was not hindered.
And therefore he said, "We are made a spectacle unto the world;" in the midst of
earth, and sea, and the heaven, and the whole habitable globe, and the world both
material and intellectual, he was drawing that portrait of his.
Would you like to see the other parts also thereof from the head
downwards? Or will you that from below we carry our description upwards?
Contemplate then a statue of gold or rather of something more costly than gold,
and such as might stand in heaven; not fixed with lead nor placed in one spot,
but hurrying from Jerusalem even unto Illyricum, [Romans 15:19] and setting
forth into Spain, and borne as it were on wings over every part of the world. For
what could be more "beautiful" than these "feet" which visited the whole earth
under the sun? This same "beauty" the prophet also from of old proclaims,