allow that they have of themselves invented what is useful for the purposes of life, but will not
grant to that God who formed the world, that of Himself He created the forms of those things which
have been made, and imparted to it its orderly arrangement?
6. But, again, how can these things [below] be images of those [above], since they are really
contrary to them, and can in no respect have sympathy with them? For those things which are
contrary to each other may indeed be destructive of those to which they are contrary, but can by
no means be their images—as, for instance, water and fire; or, again, light and darkness, and other
such things, can never be the images of one another. In like manner, neither can those things which
are corruptible and earthly, and of a compound nature, and transitory, be the images of those which,
according to these men, are spiritual; unless these very things themselves be allowed to be compound,
limited in space, and of a definite shape, and thus no longer spiritual, and diffused, and spreading
into vast extent, and incomprehensible. For they must of necessity be possessed of a definite figure,
and confined within certain limits, that they may be true images; and then it is decided that they
are not spiritual. If, however, these men maintain that they are spiritual, and diffused, and
incomprehensible, how can those things which are possessed of figure, and confined within certain
limits, be the images of such as are destitute of figure and incomprehensible?
7. If, again, they affirm that neither according to configuration nor formation, but according to
number and the order of production, those things [above] are the images [of these below], then, in
the first place, these things [below] ought not to be spoken of as images and likenesses of those
Æons that are above. For how can the things which have neither the fashion nor shape of those
[above] be their images? And, in the next place, they would adapt both the numbers and productions
of the Æons above, so as to render them identical with and similar to those that belong to the creation
[below]. But now, since they refer to only thirty Æons, and declare that the vast multitude of things
which are embraced within the creation [below] are images of those that are but thirty, we may
justly condemn them as utterly destitute of sense.

### Chapter VIII.—Created things are not a shadow of the Pleroma.
1. If, again, they declare that these things [below] are a shadow of those [above], as some of
them are bold enough to maintain, so that in this respect they are images, then it will be necessary
for them to allow that those things which are above are possessed of bodies. For those bodies which
are above do cast a shadow, but spiritual substances do not, since they can in no degree darken
others. If, however, we also grant them this point (though it is, in fact, an impossibility), that there
is a shadow belonging to those essences which are spiritual and lucent, into which they declare
their Mother descended; yet, since those things [which are above] are eternal, and that shadow
which is cast by them endures for ever, [it follows that] these things [below] are also not transitory,
but endure along with those which cast their shadow over them. If, on the other hand, these things