There is however a difference on the part of the intellect and on the
part of the will. Because, as was stated already (Question 59, Article
2), the mind's knowledge is brought about by the inward presence of
the known within the knower. It comes of the imperfection of man's
intellectual nature that his mind does not simultaneously possess all
things capable of being understood, but only a few things from
which he is moved in a measure to grasp other things. The act of the
appetitive faculty, on the contrary, follows the inclination of man
towards things; some of which are good in themselves, and
consequently are appetible in themselves; others being good only in
relation to something else, and being appetible on account of
something else. Consequently it does not argue imperfection in the
person desiring, for him to seek one thing naturally as his end, and
something else from choice as ordained to such end. Therefore,
since the intellectual nature of the angels is perfect, only natural and
not deductive knowledge is to be found in them, but there is to be
found in them both natural love and love of choice.
In saying all this, we are passing over all that regards things which
are above nature, since nature is not the sufficient principle thereof:
but we shall speak of them later on (Question 62).
Reply to Objection 1: Not all love of choice is rational love, according
as rational is distinguished from intellectual love. For rational love is
so called which follows deductive knowledge: but, as was said
above (Question 59, Article 3, ad 1), when treating of free-will, every
choice does not follow a discursive act of the reason; but only
human choice. Consequently the conclusion does not follow.
The reply to the second objection follows from what has been said.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the angel loves himself with both natural

love, and love of choice?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angel does not love himself both
with natural love and a love of choice. For, as was said (Article 2),
natural love regards the end itself; while love of choice regards the
means to the end. But the same thing, with regard to the same,
cannot be both the end and a means to the end. Therefore natural
love and the love of choice cannot have the same object.
Objection 2: Further, as Dionysius observes (Div. Nom. iv): "Love is
a uniting and a binding power." But uniting and binding imply
various things brought together. Therefore the angel cannot love
himself.
Objection 3: Further, love is a kind of movement. But every
movement tends towards something else. Therefore it seems that an
angel cannot love himself with either natural or elective love.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 8): "Love for others
comes of love for oneself."
I answer that, Since the object of love is good, and good is to be
found both in substance and in accident, as is clear from Ethic. i, 6, a
thing may be loved in two ways; first of all as a subsisting good; and
secondly as an accidental or inherent good. That is loved as a
subsisting good, which is so loved that we wish well to it. But that
which we wish unto another, is loved as an accidental or inherent
good: thus knowledge is loved, not that any good may come to it but
that it may be possessed. This kind of love has been called by the
name "concupiscence" while the first is called "friendship."
Now it is manifest that in things devoid of knowledge, everything
naturally seeks to procure what is good for itself; as fire seeks to
mount upwards. Consequently both angel and man naturally seek
their own good and perfection. This is to love self. Hence angel and
man naturally love self, in so far as by natural appetite each desires
what is good for self. On the other hand, each loves self with the love
of choice, in so far as from choice he wishes for something which
will benefit himself.