endeavoring to profit them, and move them to pity.
But when not even so did He prevail with them, then was He grieved, it is
said, and angry with them for the hardness of their heart, and He says,
"What man is there among you that shall have one sheep, and if this fall
into a pit on the Sabbath days, will he not lay hold of it, and lift it out? How
much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the
Sabbath days." [Matthew 12:3]
Thus, lest they have ground of obstinacy, and of accusing him again of
transgression, He convicts them by this example. And do thou mark, I pray you,
how variously and suitably in each case, He introduces His pleas for the
breaking of the sabbath. Thus, first, in the case of the blind man, [John 9:6] He
does not so much as defend Himself to them, when He made the clay: and yet
then also were they blaming Him; but the manner of the creation was enough to
indicate the Lord and Owner of the law. Next, in the case of the paralytic, when
he carried his bed, and they were finding fault, [John 5:9-10] He defends
Himself, now as God, and now as man; as man, when He says, "If a man on the
Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law should not be broken;" (and He
said not "that a man should be profited"); "are you angry at me, because I have
made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day?" [John 7:23] As God again,
when He says, "My Father works hitherto, and I work." [John 5:17]
But when blamed for His disciples, He said, "Have ye not read what David
did, when he was an hungered, himself and they that were with him, how he
entered into the house of God, and did eat the show-bread?" [Matthew 12:3-4]
He brings forward the priests also.
And here again; "Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days, or to do evil?
Which of you shall have one sheep?" For He knew their love of wealth, that they
were all taken up with it, rather than with love of mankind. And indeed the other
evangelist says, that He also looked about upon them when asking these
questions, that by His very eye He might win them over; but not even so did they
become better.

And yet here He speaks only; whereas elsewhere in many cases He heals by
laying on of hands also. But nevertheless none of these things made them meek;
rather, while the man was healed, they by his health became worse.
For His desire indeed was to cure them before him, and He tried
innumerable ways of healing, both by what He did in their presence, and by what
He said: but since their malady after all was incurable, He proceeded to the
work. "Then says He to the man, Stretch forth your hand. And he stretched it
forth, and it was restored whole, like as the other." [Matthew 12:13]
2. What then did they? They go forth, it is said, and take counsel together to
slay Him. For "the Pharisees," says the Scripture, "went out and held a council
against Him, how they might destroy Him." They had received no injury, yet they
went about to slay Him. So great an evil is envy. For not against strangers only,
but even against our own, is it ever warring. And Mark says, they took this
counsel with the Herodians. [Mark 3:6]
What then does the gentle and meek One? He withdrew, on being aware of
it. "But when Jesus knew their devices, He withdrew Himself," it is said, "from
them." [Matthew 12:15] Where now are they who say, miracles ought to be
done? Nay, by these things He signified, that the uncandid soul is not even
thereby persuaded; and He made it plain that His disciples too were blamed by
them without cause. This however we should observe, that they grow fierce
especially at the benefits done to their neighbors; and when they see any one
delivered either from disease or from wickedness, then is the time for them to
find fault, and become wild beasts. Thus did they calumniate Him, both when He
was about to save the harlot, and when He was eating with publicans, and now
again, when they saw the hand restored.
But do thou observe, I pray you, how He neither desists from His tender
care over the infirm, and yet allays their envy. "And great multitudes followed
Him, and He healed them all; and He charged them that were healed, that they
should make Him known to no man." Because, while the multitudes everywhere
both admire and follow Him, they desist not from their wickedness.