you by God, much more than the poor man by you. And yet God has never said
such words to you as "Stand off, since you are an impostor, always coming to
church and hearing My laws, but when abroad, setting gold, and pleasure ([ἐ]
[πιθυμίαν]), and friendship, and in fact anything above My commandments. And
now you make yourself humble, but when your prayers are over you are bold,
and cruel, and inhuman. Get you hence, therefore, and never come to Me any
more." Yet this, and more than this, we deserve to have said to us; but still He
never did reproach us in any such way, but is long-suffering and fulfils
everything on His own part, and gives us more than we ask for. Calling this to
mind then, let us relieve the poverty of those that beg of us, and if they do
impose upon us, let us not be over exact about it. For such a salvation is it that
we ourselves require, one with pardon, with kindness ([φιλανθρωπίας]), with
much mercy along with it. For it is not possible, it certainly is not, if our estate
were searched into strictly, that we should ever be saved, but we must needs be
punished and brought to ruin altogether. Let us not then be bitter judges of others
lest we also get a strict account demanded of us. For we have sins that are too
great to plead any excuse. And therefore let us show more mercy towards those
who have committed inexcusable sins, that we also may lay up for ourselves the
like mercy beforehand. And yet be as large-hearted as we may, we shall never be
able to contribute such love toward man as we stand in need of at the hand of a
God that loves man. How then is it other than monstrous, when we are in need of
so many things ourselves, to be over exact with our fellow servants, and do all
we can against ourselves? For thou dost not in this way so much prove him
unworthy of your liberality, as yourself of God's love toward man. For he that
deals over exactly with his fellow servant, will be the more sure to find the like
treatment at God's hand. Let us not speak against ourselves, but even if they
come out of idleness or wilfulness, let us bestow. For we also do many sins
through wilfulness, or rather we do them all through wilfulness, and yet God
does not presently call us to punishment, but gives us a set time for penance,
nurturing us day by day, disciplining us, teaching us, supplying us with all other

things, that we too may emulate this mercy of His. Let us then quell this cruelty,
let us cast out this brutal spirit, as benefiting thereby ourselves rather than others.
For to these we give money, and bread, and clothing, but for ourselves we are
laying up beforehand very great glory, and such as there is no putting into words.
For we receive again our bodies incorruptible, and are glorified together and
reign together with Christ. And how great this is we shall see from hence— or
rather there is no means of making us see it clearly now. But to start from our
present blessings, and to get from them at least some kind of scanty notice of it, I
will endeavor so far as I may be able to put before you what I have been
speaking of. Tell me then, if when you were grown old, and were living in
poverty, and any one were to promise suddenly to make you young, and to bring
you to the very prime of life, and to render you very strong, and preëminently
beautiful, and were to give you the kingdom of the whole earth for a thousand
years, a kingdom in the state of the deepest peace, what is there that you would
not choose to do, and to suffer to gain this promise? (4 manuscripts and Sav.
Mar. object.) See then, Christ promises not this, but much more than this. For the
distance between old age and youth is not to be compared with the difference of
corruption and incorruption, nor that of a kingdom and poverty to that of the
present glory and the future, but the difference is that of dreams and a reality. Or
rather I have yet said nothing to the purpose, since there is no language capable
of setting before you the greatness of the difference between things to come and
things present. And as for time, there is no place for the idea of difference. For
what mode is there for a man to compare with our present state a life that has no
limit? And as for the peace it is as far removed from any present peace, as peace
is different from war; and for the incorruption, it is as much better as a clear
pearl is than a clod of clay. Or rather, say as great a thing as one may, nothing
can put it before you. For were I even to compare the beauty of our bodies then
to the light of the sunbeam, or the brightest lightning, I shall not yet be saying
anything that is worthy of that brilliancy. Now for such things as these what
money so much that it were not worth the while to give up? What bodies, or