FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.9.

sorrow of correction may spring the wish to be regenerate; if indeed
he who is corrected is a son of promise, in such sort that whilst the
noise of correction is outwardly resounding and punishing, God by
hidden inspirations is inwardly causing to will," as Augustine says
(De Corr. et Gratia vi). Correction is therefore necessary, from the
fact that man's will is required in order to abstain from sin; yet it is
not sufficient without God's help. Hence it is written (Eccles. 7:14):
"Consider the works of God that no man can correct whom He hath
despised."
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Hypognosticon iii), this
saying is to be understood of man in the state of perfect nature,
when as yet he was not a slave of sin. Hence he was able to sin and
not to sin. Now, too, whatever a man wills, is given to him; but his
willing good, he has by God's assistance.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether one who has already obtained grace,

can, of himself and without further help of grace, do good and
avoid sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that whoever has already obtained grace,
can by himself and without further help of grace, do good and avoid
sin. For a thing is useless or imperfect, if it does not fulfil what it was
given for. Now grace is given to us that we may do good and keep
from sin. Hence if with grace man cannot do this, it seems that grace
is either useless or imperfect.
Objection 2: Further, by grace the Holy Spirit dwells in us, according
to 1 Cor. 3:16: "Know you not that you are the temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" Now since the Spirit of God
is omnipotent, He is sufficient to ensure our doing good and to keep
us from sin. Hence a man who has obtained grace can do the above
two things without any further assistance of grace.
Objection 3: Further, if a man who has obtained grace needs further
aid of grace in order to live righteously and to keep free from sin,
with equal reason, will he need yet another grace, even though he
has obtained this first help of grace. Therefore we must go on to
infinity; which is impossible. Hence whoever is in grace needs no
further help of grace in order to do righteously and to keep free from
sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Natura et Gratia xxvi) that "as
the eye of the body though most healthy cannot see unless it is
helped by the brightness of light, so, neither can a man, even if he is
most righteous, live righteously unless he be helped by the eternal
light of justice." But justification is by grace, according to Rm. 3:24:
"Being justified freely by His grace." Hence even a man who already
possesses grace needs a further assistance of grace in order to live
righteously.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 5), in order to live righteously
a man needs a twofold help of God---first, a habitual gift whereby
corrupted human nature is healed, and after being healed is lifted up
so as to work deeds meritoriously of everlasting life, which exceed
the capability of nature. Secondly, man needs the help of grace in
order to be moved by God to act.