THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.4.

Wherefore a Christian receives grace in Baptism, as to his soul; but
he retains a passible body, so that he may suffer for Christ therein:
yet at length he will be raised up to a life of impassibility. Hence the
Apostle says (Rm. 8:11): "He that raised up Jesus Christ from the
dead, shall quicken also our mortal bodies, because of His Spirit that
dwelleth in us ": and further on in the same chapter (Rm. 8:17):
"Heirs indeed of God, and joint heirs with Christ: yet so, if we suffer
with Him, that we may be also glorified with Him."
Secondly, this is suitable for our spiritual training: namely, in order
that, by fighting against concupiscence and other defects to which
he is subject, man may receive the crown of victory. Wherefore on
Rm. 6:6, "that the body of sin may be destroyed," a gloss says: "If a
man after Baptism live in the flesh, he has concupiscence to fight
against, and to conquer by God's help." In sign of which it is written
(Judges 3:1,2): "These are the nations which the Lord left, that by
them He might instruct Israel . . . that afterwards their children might
learn to fight with their enemies, and to be trained up to war."
Thirdly, this was suitable, lest men might seek to be baptized for the
sake of impassibility in the present life, and not for the sake of the
glory of life eternal. Wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:19): "If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable."
Reply to Objection 1: As a gloss says on Rm. 6:6, "that we may serve
sin no longer---Like a man who, having captured a redoubtable
enemy, slays him not forthwith, but suffers him to live for a little time
in shame and suffering; so did Christ first of all fetter our
punishment, but at a future time He will destroy it."
Reply to Objection 2: As the gloss says on the same passage (cf. ad
1), "the punishment of sin is twofold, the punishment of hell, and
temporal punishment. Christ entirely abolished the punishment of
hell, so that those who are baptized and truly repent, should not be
subject to it. He did not, however, altogether abolish temporal
punishment yet awhile; for hunger, thirst, and death still remain. But
He overthrew its kingdom and power" in the sense that man should
no longer be in fear of them: "and at length He will altogether
exterminate it at the last day."
Reply to Objection 3: As we stated in the FS, Question 81, Article 1;

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.4.

FS, Question 82, Article 1, ad 2 original sin spread in this way, that at
first the person infected the nature, and afterwards the nature
infected the person. Whereas Christ in reverse order at first repairs
what regards the person, and afterwards will simultaneously repair
what pertains to the nature in all men. Consequently by Baptism He
takes away from man forthwith the guilt of original sin and the
punishment of being deprived of the heavenly vision. But the
penalties of the present life, such as death, hunger, thirst, and the
like, pertain to the nature, from the principles of which they arise,
inasmuch as it is deprived of original justice. Therefore these defects
will not be taken away until the ultimate restoration of nature through
the glorious resurrection.