the devil.
The devil is not so good a marksman, as to be able to reach this height; he
sends forth his darts indeed, for he is void of all shame, yet he does not hit the
mark; the dart returns to him without effect, and not without effect only, but it
[falls] upon his own head. For what is sent forth by him must of necessity strike
[something]. As then, that which has been shot out by men, either strikes the
person against whom it is directed, or pierces bird, or fence, or garment, or
wood, or the mere air, so does the dart of the devil also. It must of necessity
strike; and if it strike not him that is shot at, it necessarily strikes him that shoots
it. And we may learn from many instances, that when we are not hit, without
doubt he is hit himself. For instance, he plotted against Job: he did not hit him,
but was struck himself. He plotted against Paul, he did not hit him, but was
struck himself. If we watch, we may see this happening everywhere. For even
when he strikes, he is hit; much more then [when he does not hit].
8. Let us turn his weapons then against himself, and having armed and
fortified ourselves with the shield of faith, let us keep guard with steadfastness,
so as to be impregnable. Now the dart of the devil is evil concupiscence. Anger
especially is a fire, a flame; it catches, destroys, consumes; let us quench it, by
longsuffering, by forbearance. For as red-hot iron dipped into water, loses its
fire, so an angry man filling in with a patient one does no harm to the patient
man, but rather benefits him, and is himself more thoroughly subdued.
For nothing is equal to longsuffering. Such a man is never insulted; but as
bodies of adamant are not wounded, so neither are such souls. For they are above
the reach of the darts. The longsuffering man is high, and so high as not to
receive a wound from the shot. When one is furious, laugh; but do not laugh
openly, lest you irritate him: but laugh mentally on his account. For in the case of
children, when they strike us passionately, as though forsooth they were
avenging themselves, we laugh. If then thou laugh, there will be as great
difference between you and him, as between a child and a man: but if you are
furious you have made yourself a child. For the angry are more senseless than

children. If one look at a furious child, does he not laugh at him? "The poorspirited" (it is said) "is mightily simple." [Proverbs 14:29] The simple then is a
child: and "he who is longsuffering" (it is said) "is abundant in wisdom." This
"abundant wisdom" then let us follow after, that we may attain to the good things
promised us in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father together with the
Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever and world without end.
Amen.

## Homily 23 on Hebrews

Hebrews 11:7
" By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the
world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by Faith."
1. " By faith" (he says) "Noah being warned of God." As the Son of God,
speaking of His own coming, said, "In the days of Noah they married and were
given in marriage" [Luke 17:26-27], therefore the Apostle also recalled to their
mind an appropriate image. For the example of Enoch, was an example only of
Faith; that of Noah, on the other hand, of unbelief also. And this is a complete
consolation and exhortation, when not only believers are found approved, but
also unbelievers suffer the opposite.
For what does he say? "By faith being warned of God." What is "being
warned of God"? It is, "It having been foretold to him." But why is the
expression "divine communication" [Luke 2:26] used? For in another place also
it is said, "and it was communicated to him by the Spirit," and again, "and what
says the divine communication?" [Romans 11:4] Do you see the equal dignity of
the Spirit? For as God reveals, so also does the Holy Spirit. But why did he
speak thus? The prophecy is called "a divine communication."
"Of things not seen as yet," he says, that is of the rain.
"Moved with fear, prepared an ark." Reason indeed suggested nothing of
this sort; For "they were marrying and being given in marriage"; the air was
clear, there were no signs [of change]: but nevertheless he feared: "By faith" (he
says) "Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an ark to the saving of his house."
How is it, "By the which he condemned the world"? He showed them to be