FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.5.

I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), these four virtues are
understood differently by various writers. For some take them as
signifying certain general conditions of the human mind, to be found
in all the virtues: so that, to wit, prudence is merely a certain
rectitude of discretion in any actions or matters whatever; justice, a
certain rectitude of the mind, whereby a man does what he ought in
any matters; temperance, a disposition of the mind, moderating any
passions or operations, so as to keep them within bounds; and
fortitude, a disposition whereby the soul is strengthened for that
which is in accord with reason, against any assaults of the passions,
or the toil involved by any operations. To distinguish these four
virtues in this way does not imply that justice, temperance and
fortitude are distinct virtuous habits: because it is fitting that every
moral virtue, from the fact that it is a "habit," should be accompanied
by a certain firmness so as not to be moved by its contrary: and this,
we have said, belongs to fortitude. Moreover, inasmuch as it is a
"virtue," it is directed to good which involves the notion of right and
due; and this, we have said, belongs to justice. Again, owing to the
fact that it is a "moral virtue" partaking of reason, it observes the
mode of reason in all things, and does not exceed its bounds, which
has been stated to belong to temperance. It is only in the point of
having discretion, which we ascribed to prudence, that there seems
to be a distinction from the other three, inasmuch as discretion
belongs essentially to reason; whereas the other three imply a
certain share of reason by way of a kind of application (of reason) to
passions or operations. According to the above explanation, then,
prudence would be distinct from the other three virtues: but these
would not be distinct from one another; for it is evident that one and
the same virtue is both habit, and virtue, and moral virtue.
Others, however, with better reason, take these four virtues,
according as they have their special determinate matter; each of its
own matter, in which special commendation is given to that general
condition from which the virtue's name is taken as stated above
(Article 3). In this way it is clear that the aforesaid virtues are distinct
habits, differentiated in respect of their diverse objects.
Reply to Objection 1: Gregory is speaking of these four virtues in the
first sense given above. It may also be said that these four virtues
qualify one another by a kind of overflow. For the qualities of
prudence overflow on to the other virtues in so far as they are
directed by prudence. And each of the others overflows on to the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.5.

rest, for the reason that whoever can do what is harder, can do what
is less difficult. Wherefore whoever can curb his desires for the
pleasures of touch, so that they keep within bounds, which is a very
hard thing to do, for this very reason is more able to check his
daring in dangers of death, so as not to go too far, which is much
easier; and in this sense fortitude is said to be temperate. Again,
temperance is said to be brave, by reason of fortitude overflowing
into temperance: in so far, to wit, as he whose mind is strengthened
by fortitude against dangers of death, which is a matter of very great
difficulty, is more able to remain firm against the onslaught of
pleasures; for as Cicero says (De Offic. i), "it would be inconsistent
for a man to be unbroken by fear, and yet vanquished by cupidity; or
that he should be conquered by lust, after showing himself to be
unconquered by toil."
From this the Reply to the Second Objection is clear. For temperance
observes the mean in all things, and fortitude keeps the mind unbent
by the enticements of pleasures, either in so far as these virtues are
taken to denote certain general conditions of virtue, or in the sense
that they overflow on to one another, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: These four general conditions of virtue set
down by the Philosopher, are not proper to the aforesaid virtues.
They may, however, be appropriated to them, in the way above
stated.