even to make a list of them is no easy matter? He was put in prison, loaded with
chains, dragged hither and hither, scourged by the Jews, stoned, lacerated on the
back not only by thongs, but also by rods, he was immersed in the sea,
oftentimes beset by robbers, involved in strife with his own countrymen,
continually assailed both by foes and by acquaintance, subjected to countless
intrigues, struggling with hunger and nakedness, undergoing other frequent and
lasting mischances and afflictions: and why need I mention the greater part of
them? He was dying every day: but yet, although subjected to so many and such
grievous sufferings, he not only uttered no blasphemous word, but rejoiced over
these things and gloried in them: and one time he says "I rejoice in my
sufferings," [Colossians 1:24] and then again "not only this but we also glory in
afflictions." [Romans 5:3] If then he rejoiced and gloried when suffering such
great troubles what excuse will you have, and what defence will you make if you
blaspheme when you do not undergo the smallest fraction of them.
6. But I am injured in other ways, one will say, and even if I do not
blaspheme, yet when I am robbed of my money I am disabled from giving alms.
This is a mere pretext and pretence. For if you grieve on this account know
certainly that poverty is no bar to almsgiving. For even if you are infinitely poor
you are not poorer than the woman who possessed only a handful of meal,
[1 Kings 17:12] and the one who had only two mites, [Luke 21:2] each of whom
having spent all her substance upon those who were in need was an object of
surpassing admiration: and such great poverty was no hindrance to such great
lovingkindness, but the alms bestowed from the two mites was so abundant and
generous as to eclipse all who had riches, and in wealth of intention and
superabundance of zeal to surpass those who cast in much coin. Wherefore even
in this matter you are not injured but rather benefitted, receiving by means of a
small contribution rewards more glorious than they who put down large sums.
But since, if I were to say these things for ever, sensuous characters which
delight to grovel in worldly things, and revel in present things would not readily
endure parting from the fading flowers (for such are the pleasant things of this

life) or letting go its shadows: but the better sort of men indeed cling to both the
one and the other, while the more pitiable and abject cling more strongly to the
former than to the latter, come let us strip off the pleasant and showy masks
which hide the base and ugly countenance of these things, and let us expose the
foul deformity of the harlot. For such is the character of a life of this kind which
is devoted to luxury, and wealth and power: it is foul and ugly and full of much
abomination, disagreeable and burdensome, and charged with bitterness. For this
indeed is the special feature in this life which deprives those who are captivated
by it of every excuse, that although it is the aim of their longings and
endeavours, yet is it filled with much annoyance and bitterness, and teems with
innumerable evils, dangers, bloodshed, precipices, crags, murders, fears and
tremblings, envy and ill-will, and intrigue, perpetual anxiety and care, and
derives no profit, and produces no fruit from these great evils save punishment
and revenge, and incessant torment. But although this is its character it seems to
be to most men an object of ambition, and eager contention, which is a sign of
the folly of those who are captivated by it, not of the blessedness of the thing
itself. Little children indeed are eager and excited about toys and cannot take
notice of the things which become full grown men. There is an excuse for them
on account of their immaturity: but these others are debarred from the right of
defence, because, although of full age they are childish in disposition, and more
foolish than children in their manner of life.
Now tell me why is wealth an object of ambition? For it is necessary to start
from this point, because to the majority of those who are afflicted with this
grievous malady it seems to be more precious than health and life, and public
reputation, and good opinion, and country, and household, and friends, and
kindred and everything else. Moreover the flame has ascended to the very
clouds: and this fierce heat has taken possession of land and sea. Nor is there any
one to quench this fire: but all people are engaged in stirring it up, both those
who have been already caught by it, and those who have not yet been caught, in
order that they may be captured. And you may see every one, husband and wife,