need for a special genus of appetitive powers, since the natural
appetite of the powers would suffice.
Reply to Objection 4: Although sense and appetite are principles of
movement in perfect animals, yet sense and appetite, as such, are
not sufficient to cause movement, unless another power be added to
them; for immovable animals have sense and appetite, and yet they
have not the power of motion. Now this motive power is not only in
the appetite and sense as commanding the movement, but also in
the parts of the body, to make them obey the appetite of the soul
which moves them. Of this we have a sign in the fact that when the
members are deprived of their natural disposition, they do not move
in obedience to the appetite.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the parts of the vegetative soul are

fittingly described as the nutritive, augmentative, and
generative?
Objection 1: It would seem that the parts of the vegetative soul are
not fittingly described---namely, the nutritive, augmentative, and
generative. For these are called "natural" forces. But the powers of
the soul are above the natural forces. Therefore we should not class
the above forces as powers of the soul.
Objection 2: Further, we should not assign a particular power of the
soul to that which is common to living and non-living things. But
generation is common to all things that can be generated and
corrupted, whether living or not living. Therefore the generative force
should not be classed as a power of the soul.
Objection 3: Further, the soul is more powerful than the body. But
the body by the same force gives species and quantity; much more,
therefore, does the soul. Therefore the augmentative power of the
soul is not distinct from the generative power.
Objection 4: Further, everything is preserved in being by that
whereby it exists. But the generative power is that whereby a living
thing exists. Therefore by the same power the living thing is
preserved. Now the nutritive force is directed to the preservation of
the living thing (De Anima ii, 4), being "a power which is capable of
preserving whatever receives it." Therefore we should not
distinguish the nutritive power from the generative.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 2,4) that the
operations of this soul are "generation, the use of food," and (cf. De
Anima iii, 9) "growth."
I answer that, The vegetative part has three powers. For the
vegetative part, as we have said (Article 1), has for its object the
body itself, living by the soul; for which body a triple operation of the
soul is required. One is whereby it acquires existence, and to this is
directed the "generative" power. Another is whereby the living body
acquires its due quantity; to this is directed the "augmentative"
power. Another is whereby the body of a living thing is preserved in
its existence and in its due quantity; to this is directed the "nutritive"