His death, and by the mysteries also, in every way confounding those that are
diseased with the pest of Marcion. For this reason He suffers even the chief
apostle to deny Him. But if He was not bound nor crucified, whence sprung the
fear to Peter, and to the rest of the apostles.
He suffers them not however, on the other hand, to wait until the sorrows,
but what says He? "But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee."
For not from Heaven does He appear at once, neither will He depart into any
distant country, but in the same nation, in which He had also been crucified,
nearly in the same place, so as hereby again to assure them that He that was
crucified was the very same that rose again, and in this way to comfort them
more abundantly when in sorrow. Therefore also He said "in Galilee," that being
freed from the fears of the Jews they might believe His saying. For which cause
indeed He appeared there.
"But Peter answered and said, Though all men should be offended because
of You, yet will I never be offended."
3. What do you say, O Peter? The prophet said, "The sheep shall be
scattered;" Christ has confirmed the saying, and do you say, No? Is not what
passed before enough, when Thou said, "Far be it from You," [Matthew 16:22]
and your mouth was stopped? For this then He suffers him to fall, teaching him
thereby to believe Christ in all things, and to account His declaration more
trustworthy than one's own conscience. And the rest too reaped no small benefit
from his denial, having come to know man's weakness, and God?' s truth. For
when He foretells anything, we must no longer be subtle, nor lift up ourselves
above the common sort. For, "your rejoicing," it is said, "you shall have in
yourself, and not in another." For where he should have prayed, and have said,
Help us, that we be not cut off, he is confident in himself, and says, "Though all
men should be offended in You, yet will I never;" though all should undergo this,
I shall not undergo it, which led him on little by little to self-confidence. Christ
then, out of a desire to put down this, permitted his denial. For since he neither
submitted to Him nor the prophet (and yet for this intent He brought in the

prophet besides, that they may not gainsay), but nevertheless since he submitted
not to His words, he is instructed by deeds.
For in proof that for this intent He permitted it, that He might amend this in
him, hear what He says, "I have prayed for you, that your faith fail not." For this
He said sharply reproving him, and showing that his fall was more grievous than
the rest, and needed more help. For the matters of blame were two; both that he
gainsaid; and, that he set himself before the other; or rather a third too, namely,
that he attributed all to himself.
To cure these things then, He suffered the fall to take place, and for this
cause also leaves the others, and addresses Himself earnestly to him. For,
"Simon," says He, "Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you that he may sift
you as wheat;" that is, that he may trouble, confound, tempt you; but "I have
prayed for you, that your faith fail not."
And why, if Satan desired all, did He not say concerning all, I have prayed
for you? Is it not quite plain that it is this, which I have mentioned before, that it
is as reproving him, and showing that his fall was more grievous than the rest,
that He directs His words to him?
And wherefore said He not, But I did not suffer it, rather than, "I have
prayed?" He speaks from this time lowly things, on His way to His passion, that
He may show His humanity. For He that has built His church upon Peter's
confession, and has so fortified it, that ten thousand dangers and deaths are not to
prevail over it; He that has given him the keys of Heaven, and has put him in
possession of so much authority, and in no manner needed a prayer for these
ends (for neither did He say, I have prayed, but with His own authority, "I will
build my church, and I will give you the keys of Heaven"), how should He need
to pray, that He might brace up the shaken soul of a single man? Wherefore then
did He speak in this way? For the cause which I mentioned, and because of their
weakness, for they had not as yet the becoming view of Him.
How then was it that He denied? He said not, that you may not deny, but
that your faith fail not, that you perish not utterly. For this came from His care.