of unbelievers; but say, "He sleeps and will rise again," "He is gone a journey
and will return with the King." Who says this? He that has Christ speaking in
him. "For," says he, "if we believe that Jesus died and rose again" and revived,
"even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him." [1
Thessalonians 4:14] If then thou seek your son, there seek him where the King
is, where is the army of the Angels; not in the grave; not in the earth; lest while
he is so highly exalted, yourself remain grovelling on the ground.
If we have this true wisdom, we shall easily repel all this kind of distress;
and "the God of mercies and Father of all comfort" comfort all our hearts, both
those who are oppressed with such grief and those held down with any other
sorrow; and grant us deliverance from all despair and increase of spiritual joy;
and to obtain the good things to come; whereunto may all we attain, through the
grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom unto the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 2 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 1:6-7
Whether we be afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation, which works
in the patient enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer: and our hope
for you is steadfast.
Having spoken of one, and that the chief ground of comfort and
consolation, namely, having fellowship [by sufferings] with Christ: he lays down
as second this which he now mentions, namely, that the salvation of the disciples
themselves was procured thereby. "Faint not, therefore, he says, nor be
confounded and afraid because we are afflicted; for this same thing were rather
a reason for your being of good cheer: for had we not been afflicted, this had
been the ruin of you all." How and wherein? For if through lack of spirit and fear
of danger we had not preached unto you the word whereby ye learned the true
knowledge, your situation had been desperate. Do you see again the vehemence
and earnest contention of Paul? The very things which troubled them he uses for
their comfort. For, says he, the greater the intensity of our persecutions, the
greater should be the increase of your good hope; because the more abundant
also in proportion is your salvation and consolation. For what has equal force of
consolation with this of having obtained such good things through the preaching.
Then that he may not seem to be bringing the encomium round to himself alone,
see how he makes them too to share these praises. For to the words, "Whether we
be afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation:" he adds, "which works in the
patient enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer." [2 Corinthians 1:7]
Afterwards, indeed, he states this more clearly, thus saying, "As you are
partakers of the sufferings, so also are you of the consolation;" but here also
meanwhile he alludes to it in the words, "the same sufferings," so making what