of our evils, and all the channels of our diseases will be stayed. For the disease is
not palsy only, but also our sin; and this more than that, by how much a soul is
better than a body.
Let us therefore now also draw near unto Him; let us entreat Him that He
would brace our paralyzed soul, and leaving all things that pertain to this life, let
us take account of the things spiritual only. Or if you cleave unto these also, yet
think of them after the other.
Neither must you think lightly of it, because you have no pain in sinning;
rather on this very account most of all do thou lament, that you feel not the
anguish of your offenses. For not because sin bites not, does this come to pass,
but because the offending soul is insensible. Regard with this view them that
have a feeling of their own sins, how they wail more bitterly than such as are
being cut, or burned; how many things they do, how many suffer, how greatly
they mourn and lament, in order to be delivered from their evil conscience. They
would not do any such thing, unless they were exceedingly pained in soul.
The best thing then is, to avoid sin in the first instance: the next to it, is to
feel that we sin, and thoroughly amend ourselves. But if we have not this, how
shall we pray to God, and ask forgiveness of our sins, we who take no account of
these matters? For when you yourself who hast offended art unwilling to know
so much as this very fact, that you have sinned; for what manner of offenses will
you entreat God for pardon? For what you know not? And how will you know
the greatness of the benefit? Tell therefore your offenses in particular, that you
may learn for what you receive forgiveness, that so you may become grateful
towards your Benefactor.
But you, when it is a man whom you have provoked, entreatest friends,
neighbors, and door-keepers, and spendest money, and consumest many days in
visiting and petitioning, and though he that is provoked utterly reject you once,
twice, ten thousand times over, you despond not, but becoming more earnest you
make the more entreaty; but when the God of all is provoked, we gape, and
throw ourselves back, and live in luxury and in drunkenness, and do all things as

usual. And when shall we be able to propitiate Him? And how shall we by this
very thing fail to provoke Him so much the more? For not so much sinning, as
signing without even pain, causes in Him indignation and wrath. Wherefore it
were meet after all this to sink into the very earth, and not so much as to behold
this sun, nor to breathe at all, for that having so placable a Master, we provoke
Him first, and then have no remorse for provoking Him. And yet He assuredly,
even when He is angry, does not so as hating and turning away from us, but in
order that in this way at least He may win us over to Himself. For if He
continued after insult befriending you, you would the more despise Him.
Therefore in order that this may not be, He turns away for a little while, to have
you ever with Himself.
6. Let us now, I pray you, take courage at His love to man, and let us show
forth an anxious repentance, before the day come on, which permits us not to
profit thereby. For as yet all depends on us, but then He that judges has alone
control over the sentence. "Let us therefore come before His face with
confession;" let us bewail, let us mourn. For if we should be able to prevail upon
the Judge before the appointed day to forgive us our sins, then we need not so
much as enter into the court; as on the other hand, if this be not done, He will
hear us publicly in the presence of the world, and we shall no longer have any
hope of pardon. For no one of those who have not done away with their sins
here, when he has departed there shall be able to escape his account for them;
but as they who are taken out of these earthly prisons are brought in their chains
to the place of judgment, even so all souls, when they have gone away hence
bound with the manifold chains of their sins, are led to the awful judgment-seat.
For in truth our present life is nothing better than a prison. But as when we have
entered into that apartment, we see all bound with chains; so now if we withdraw
ourselves from outward show, and enter into each man's life, into each man's
soul, we shall see it bound with chains more grievous than iron: and this most
especially if you enter into the souls of them that are rich. For the more men
have about them, so much the more are they bound. As therefore with regard to