THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.4.

the same to attribute to the human nature in Christ a proper
hypostasis and a proper person. And the holy Fathers, seeing this,
condemned both in the Fifth Council held at Constantinople, saying:
"If anyone seeks to introduce into the mystery of the Incarnation two
subsistences or two persons, let him be anathema. For by the
incarnation of one of the Holy Trinity, God the Word, the Holy Trinity
received no augment of person or subsistence." Now "subsistence"
is the same as the subsisting thing, which is proper to hypostasis,
as is plain from Boethius (De Duab. Nat.). Secondly, because if it is
granted that person adds to hypostasis something in which the
union can take place, this something is nothing else than a property
pertaining to dignity; according as it is said by some that a person is
a "hypostasis distinguished by a property pertaining to dignity." If,
therefore, the union took place in the person and not in the
hypostasis, it follows that the union only took place in regard to
some dignity. And this is what Cyril, with the approval of the Council
of Ephesus (part iii, can. 3), condemned in these terms: "If anyone
after the uniting divides the subsistences in the one Christ, only
joining them in a union of dignity or authority or power, and not
rather in a concourse of natural union, let him be anathema." Thirdly,
because to the hypostasis alone are attributed the operations and
the natural properties, and whatever belongs to the nature in the
concrete; for we say that this man reasons, and is risible, and is a
rational animal. So likewise this man is said to be a suppositum,
because he underlies [supponitur] whatever belongs to man and
receives its predication. Therefore, if there is any hypostasis in
Christ besides the hypostasis of the Word, it follows that whatever
pertains to man is verified of some other than the Word, e.g. that He
was born of a Virgin, suffered, was crucified, was buried. And this,
too, was condemned with the approval of the Council of Ephesus
(part iii, can. 4) in these words: "If anyone ascribes to two persons or
subsistences such words as are in the evangelical and apostolic
Scriptures, or have been said of Christ by the saints, or by Himself of
Himself, and, moreover, applies some of them to the man, taken as
distinct from the Word of God, and some of them (as if they could be
used of God alone) only to the Word of God the Father, let him be
anathema." Therefore it is plainly a heresy condemned long since by
the Church to say that in Christ there are two hypostases, or two
supposita, or that the union did not take place in the hypostasis or
suppositum. Hence in the same Synod (can. 2) it is said: "If anyone
does not confess that the Word was united to flesh in subsistence,
and that Christ with His flesh is both---to wit, God and man---let him
be anathema."