was justified by Faith, for the Law was not then given, but what instance would
be found of Faith justifying after the delivery of the Law? He addresses himself
to this, and proves more than they required: namely, not only that Faith was
justifying, but that the Law brought its adherents under a curse. To be sure of
this, listen to the very words of the Apostle.
Ver. 10. "For as many as are of the works of the Law are under a curse."
This is what he lays down, before proving it; and what is the proof? It is
from the Law itself:—
Ver. 10, 11. "For it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Now that no man is
justified by the Law is evident."
For all have sinned, and are under the curse. However he does not say this
yet, lest he should seem to lay it down of himself, but here again establishes his
point by a text which concisely states both points; that no man has fulfilled the
Law, (wherefore they are under the curse,) and, that Faith justifies. What then is
the text? It is in the book of the prophet Habakkuk, "The just shall live by faith,"
[Habakkuk 2:4] which not only establishes the righteousness that is of Faith, but
also that there is no salvation through the Law. As no one, he says, kept the Law,
but all were under the curse, on account of transgression, an easy way was
provided, that from Faith, which is in itself a strong proof that no man can be
justified by the Law. For the prophet says not, "The just shall live by the Law,"
but, "by faith:"
Ver. 12. "And the Law is not of faith; but He that does them shall live in
them."
For the Law requires not only Faith but works also, but grace saves and
justifies by Faith. [Ephesians 2:8]
You see how he proves that they are under the curse who cleave to the Law,
because it is impossible to fulfill it; next, how comes Faith to have this justifying
power? For to this doctrine he already stood pledged, and now maintains it with
great force of argument. The Law being too weak to lead man to righteousness,

an effectual remedy was provided in Faith, which is the means of rendering that
possible which was "impossible by the Law." [Romans 8:3] Now as the Scripture
says, "the just shall live by faith," thus repudiating salvation by the Law, and
moreover as Abraham was justified by Faith, it is evident that its efficacy is very
great. And it is also clear, that he who abides not by the Law is cursed, and that
he who keeps to Faith is just. But, you may ask me, how I prove that this curse is
not still of force? Abraham lived before the Law, but we, who once were subject
to the yoke of bondage, have made ourselves liable to the curse; and who shall
release us therefrom? Observe his ready answer to this; his former remark was
sufficient; for, if a man be once justified, and has died to the Law and embraced
a novel life, how can such a one be subject to the curse? However, this is not
enough for him, so he begins with a fresh argument, as follows:—
Ver. 13. "Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, having become a
curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree."
In reality, the people were subject to another curse, which says, "Cursed is
every one that continues not in the things that are written in the book of the
Law." [Deuteronomy 27:26] To this curse, I say, people were subject, for no man
had continued in, or was a keeper of, the whole Law; but Christ exchanged this
curse for the other, "Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree." As then both he
who hanged on a tree, and he who transgresses the Law, is cursed, and as it was
necessary for him who is about to relieve from a curse himself to be free from it,
but to receive another instead of it, therefore Christ took upon Him such another,
and thereby relieved us from the curse. It was like an innocent man's undertaking
to die for another sentenced to death, and so rescuing him from punishment. For
Christ took upon Him not the curse of transgression, but the other curse, in order
to remove that of others. For, "He had done no violence neither was any deceit in
His mouth." [Isaiah 53:9; 1 Peter 2:22] And as by dying He rescued from death
those who were dying, so by taking upon Himself the curse, He delivered them
from it.
Ver. 14. "That upon the Gentiles might come the blessing of Abraham."