FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.2.

governs him either in spiritual or in temporal matters, as a member
either of the state or of the household; thirdly, it is subjected to the
universal order of the Divine government. Now each of these orders
is disturbed by sin, for the sinner acts against his reason, and
against human and Divine law. Wherefore he incurs a threefold
punishment; one, inflicted by himself, viz. remorse of conscience;
another, inflicted by man; and a third, inflicted by God.
Reply to Objection 1: Punishment follows sin, inasmuch as this is an
evil by reason of its being inordinate. Wherefore just as evil is
accidental to the sinner's act, being beside his intention, so also is
the debt of punishment.
Reply to Objection 2: Further, a just punishment may be inflicted
either by God or by man: wherefore the punishment itself is the
effect of sin, not directly but dispositively. Sin, however, makes man
deserving of punishment, and that is an evil: for Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. iv) that "punishment is not an evil, but to deserve punishment
is." Consequently the debt of punishment is considered to be
directly the effect of sin.
Reply to Objection 3: This punishment of the "inordinate affection" is
due to sin as overturning the order of reason. Nevertheless sin
incurs a further punishment, through disturbing the order of the
Divine or human law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sin can be the punishment of sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin cannot be the punishment of sin.
For the purpose of punishment is to bring man back to the good of
virtue, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. x, 9). Now sin does not
bring man back to the good of virtue, but leads him in the opposite
direction. Therefore sin is not the punishment of sin.
Objection 2: Further, just punishments are from God, as Augustine
says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 82). But sin is not from God, and is an injustice.
Therefore sin cannot be the punishment of sin.
Objection 3: Further, the nature of punishment is to be something
against the will. But sin is something from the will, as shown above
(Question 74, Articles 1,2). Therefore sin cannot be the punishment
of sin.
On the contrary, Gregory speaks (Hom. xi in Ezech.) that some sins
are punishments of others.
I answer that, We may speak of sin in two ways: first, in its essence,
as such; secondly, as to that which is accidental thereto. Sin as such
can nowise be the punishment of another. Because sin considered in
its essence is something proceeding from the will, for it is from this
that it derives the character of guilt. Whereas punishment is
essentially something against the will, as stated in the FP, Question
48, Article 5. Consequently it is evident that sin regarded in its
essence can nowise be the punishment of sin.
On the other hand, sin can be the punishment of sin accidentally in
three ways. First, when one sin is the cause of another, by removing
an impediment thereto. For passions, temptations of the devil, and
the like are causes of sin, but are impeded by the help of Divine
grace which is withdrawn on account of sin. Wherefore since the
withdrawal of grace is a punishment, and is from God, as stated
above (Question 79, Article 3), the result is that the sin which ensues
from this is also a punishment accidentally. It is in this sense that
the Apostle speaks (Rm. 1:24) when he says: "Wherefore God gave
them up to the desires of their heart," i.e. to their passions; because,
to wit, when men are deprived of the help of Divine grace, they are
overcome by their passions. In this way sin is always said to be the