FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.2.

law. Accordingly the eternal law is nothing else than the type of
Divine Wisdom, as directing all actions and movements.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking in that passage of the
ideal types which regard the proper nature of each single thing; and
consequently in them there is a certain distinction and plurality,
according to their different relations to things, as stated in the FP,
Question 15, Article 2. But law is said to direct human acts by
ordaining them to the common good, as stated above (Question 90,
Article 2). And things, which are in themselves different, may be
considered as one, according as they are ordained to one common
thing. Wherefore the eternal law is one since it is the type of this
order.
Reply to Objection 2: With regard to any sort of word, two points may
be considered: viz. the word itself, and that which is expressed by
the word. For the spoken word is something uttered by the mouth of
man, and expresses that which is signified by the human word. The
same applies to the human mental word, which is nothing else that
something conceived by the mind, by which man expresses his
thoughts mentally. So then in God the Word conceived by the
intellect of the Father is the name of a Person: but all things that are
in the Father's knowledge, whether they refer to the Essence or to
the Persons, or to the works of God, are expressed by this Word, as
Augustine declares (De Trin. xv, 14). And among other things
expressed by this Word, the eternal law itself is expressed thereby.
Nor does it follow that the eternal law is a Personal name in God: yet
it is appropriated to the Son, on account of the kinship between type
and word.
Reply to Objection 3: The types of the Divine intellect do not stand in
the same relation to things, as the types of the human intellect. For
the human intellect is measured by things, so that a human concept
is not true by reason of itself, but by reason of its being consonant
with things, since "an opinion is true or false according as it answers
to the reality." But the Divine intellect is the measure of things: since
each thing has so far truth in it, as it represents the Divine intellect,
as was stated in the FP, Question 16, Article 1. Consequently the
Divine intellect is true in itself; and its type is truth itself.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the eternal law is known to all?

Objection 1: It would seem that the eternal law is not known to all.
Because, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 2:11), "the things that are of
God no man knoweth, but the Spirit of God." But the eternal law is a
type existing in the Divine mind. Therefore it is unknown to all save
God alone.
Objection 2: Further, as Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 6) "the eternal
law is that by which it is right that all things should be most orderly."
But all do not know how all things are most orderly. Therefore all do
not know the eternal law.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xxxi) that "the
eternal law is not subject to the judgment of man." But according to
Ethic. i, "any man can judge well of what he knows." Therefore the
eternal law is not known to us.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 6) that "knowledge of
the eternal law is imprinted on us."
I answer that, A thing may be known in two ways: first, in itself;
secondly, in its effect, wherein some likeness of that thing is found:
thus someone not seeing the sun in its substance, may know it by its
rays. So then no one can know the eternal law, as it is in itself,
except the blessed who see God in His Essence. But every rational
creature knows it in its reflection, greater or less. For every
knowledge of truth is a kind of reflection and participation of the
eternal law, which is the unchangeable truth, as Augustine says (De
Vera Relig. xxxi). Now all men know the truth to a certain extent, at
least as to the common principles of the natural law: and as to the
others, they partake of the knowledge of truth, some more, some
less; and in this respect are more or less cognizant of the eternal
law.
Reply to Objection 1: We cannot know the things that are of God, as
they are in themselves; but they are made known to us in their
effects, according to Rm. 1:20: "The invisible things of God . . . are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made."
Reply to Objection 2: Although each one knows the eternal law