SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.2.

I answer that, Moral virtue consists in the things pertaining to man
being directed by his reason. Now it is manifest that the outward
movements of man are dirigible by reason, since the outward
members are set in motion at the command of reason. Hence it is
evident that there is a moral virtue concerned with the direction of
these movements.
Now the direction of these movements may be considered from a
twofold standpoint. First, in respect of fittingness to the person;
secondly, in respect of fittingness to externals, whether persons,
business, or place. Hence Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 18): "Beauty of
conduct consists in becoming behavior towards others, according to
their sex and person," and this regards the first. As to the second, he
adds: "This is the best way to order our behavior, this is the polish
becoming to every action."
Hence Andronicus [De Affectibus] ascribes two things to these
outward movements: namely "taste" [ornatus] which regards what is
becoming to the person, wherefore he says that it is the knowledge
of what is becoming in movement and behavior; and
"methodicalness" [bona ordinatio] which regards what is becoming
to the business in hand, and to one's surroundings, wherefore he
calls it "the practical knowledge of separation," i.e. of the distinction
of "acts."
Reply to Objection 1: Outward movements are signs of the inward
disposition, according to Ecclus. 19:27, "The attire of the body, and
the laughter of the teeth, and the gait of the man, show what he is";
and Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 18) that "the habit of mind is seen in
the gesture of the body," and that "the body's movement is an index
of the soul."
Reply to Objection 2: Although it is from natural disposition that a
man is inclined to this or that style of outward movement,
nevertheless what is lacking to nature can be supplied by the efforts
of reason. Hence Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 18): "Let nature guide
the movement: and if nature fail in any respect, surely effort will
supply the defect."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated (ad 1) outward movements are
indications of the inward disposition, and this regards chiefly the
passions of the soul. Wherefore Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 18) that

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.2.

"from these things," i.e. the outward movements, "the man that lies
hidden in our hearts is esteemed to be either frivolous, or boastful,
or impure, or on the other hand sedate, steady, pure, and free from
blemish." It is moreover from our outward movements that other
men form their judgment about us, according to Ecclus. 19:26, "A
man is known by his look, and a wise man, when thou meetest him,
is known by his countenance." Hence moderation of outward
movements is directed somewhat to other persons, according to the
saying of Augustine in his Rule (Ep. ccxi), "In all your movements, let
nothing be done to offend the eye of another, but only that which is
becoming to the holiness of your state." Wherefore the moderation
of outward movements may be reduced to two virtues, which the
Philosopher mentions in Ethic. iv, 6,7. For, in so far as by outward
movements we are directed to other persons, the moderation of our
outward movements belongs to "friendliness or affability" [Question
114, Article 1]. This regards pleasure or pain which may arise from
words or deeds in reference to others with whom a man comes in
contact. And, in so far as outward movements are signs of our
inward disposition, their moderation belongs to the virtue of
truthfulness [Question 9], whereby a man, by word and deed, shows
himself to be such as he is inwardly.
Reply to Objection 4: It is censurable to study the style of one's
outward movements, by having recourse to pretense in them, so that
they do not agree with one's inward disposition. Nevertheless it
behooves one to study them, so that if they be in any way inordinate,
this may be corrected. Hence Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 18): "Let
them be without artifice, but not without correction."