after so heavy an accusation to say, "All whatsoever they command you to do,
do." For they speak not their own words, but God's, what He appointed for laws
by Moses. And mark how much honor He showed towards Moses, again
showing His agreement with the Old Testament; since indeed even by this does
He make them objects of reverence. "For they sit," He says, "on Moses' seat."
For because He was not able to make them out worthy of credit by their life, He
does it from the grounds that were open to Him, from their seat, and their
succession from him. But when you hear all, do not understand all the law, as,
for instance, the ordinances about meats, those about sacrifices, and the like; for
how was He to say so of these things, which He had taken away beforehand? But
He meant all things that correct the moral principle, and amend the disposition,
and agree with the laws of the New Testament, and suffer them not any more to
be under the yoke of the law.
Wherefore then does He give these things divine authority, not from the law
of grace, but from Moses? Because it was not yet time, before the crucifixion,
for these things to be plainly declared.
But to me He seems, in addition to what has been said, to be providing for
another object, in saying these things. For since He was on the point of accusing
them, that He might not seem in the sight of the foolish to set His heart on this
authority of theirs, or for enmity to be doing these things, first He removed this
thought, and having set himself clear from suspicion, then begins His accusation.
And for what intent does He convict them, and run out into a long discourse
against them? To set the multitude on their guard, so that they might not fall into
the same sins. For neither is dissuading like pointing out those that have
offended; much as recommending what is right, is not like bringing forward
those that have done well. For this cause also He is beforehand in saying, "Do
not after their works." For, lest they should suppose, because of their listening to
them, they ought also to imitate them, He uses this means of correction, and
makes what seems to be their dignity a charge against them. For what can be
more wretched than a teacher, when the preservation of his disciples is, not to

give heed to his life? So that what seems to be their dignity is a most heavy
charge against them, when they are shown to live such a life, as they that imitate
are ruined.
For this cause He also falls upon His accusations against them, but not for
this only, but that He might show, that both their former unbelief wherewith they
had not believed, and the crucifixion after this, which they dared to perpetrate,
were not a charge against Him who was crucified and disbelieved, but against
their perverseness.
But see whence He begins, and whence He aggravates His blame of them.
"For they say," He says, "and do not." For every one is worthy of blame in
transgressing the law, but especially he that bears the authority of teaching, for
doubly and triply does he deserve to be condemned. For one cause, because he
transgresses; for another, that as he ought to amend others, and then halts, he is
worthy of a double punishment, because of his dignity; and in the third place,
that he even corrupts the more, as committing such transgression in a teacher's
place.
And together with these He mentions also another charge against them, that
they are harsh to those accountable to them.
"For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on
men's shoulders, but they will not move them with their finger." He mentions
here a twofold wickedness, their requiring great and extreme strictness of life,
without any indulgence, from those over whom they rule, and their allowing to
themselves great security; the opposite to which the truly good ruler ought to
hold; in what concerns himself, to be an unpardoning and severe judge, but in
the matters of those whom he rules, to be gentle and ready to make allowances;
the contrary to which was the conduct of these men.
2. For such are all they who practise self restraint in mere words,
unpardoning and grievous to bear as having no experience of the difficulty in
actions. And this itself too is no small fault, and in no ordinary way increases the
former charge.