Because this sex was made inferior, therefore both in His birth and in His
resurrection this first tastes of His grace.
But after Peter, He appears also to each at intervals, and at one time to
fewer, at another to more, hereby making them witnesses and teachers of each
other, and rendering His apostles trustworthy in all that they said.
6. "And last of all, as unto one born out of due time, he appeared to me
also." What mean here his expressions of humility, or wherein are they
seasonable? For if he wishes to show himself worthy of credit and to enrol
himself among the witnesses of the resurrection, he is doing the contrary of what
he wishes: since it were meet that he exalt himself and show that he was great,
which in many places he does, the occasion calling for it. Well, the very reason
why he here also speaks modestly is his being about to do this. Not straightway,
however, but with his own peculiar good sense: in that having first spoken
modestly and heaped up against himself many charges, he then magnifies the
things concerning himself. What may the reason be? That, when he comes to
utter that great and lofty expression concerning himself, "I labored more
abundantly than all," his discourse may be rendered more acceptable, both
hereby, and by its being spoken as a consequence of what went before and not as
a leading topic. Therefore also writing to Timothy, and intending to say great
things concerning himself, he first sets down his charges against himself. For so
all persons, when speaking in high terms of others, speak out freely and with
boldness: but he that is compelled to praise himself, and especially when he also
calls himself to witness, is disconcerted and blushes. Therefore also this blessed
man first declares his own misery, and then utters that lofty expression. This then
he does, partly to abate the offensiveness of speaking about himself, and partly
that he might hereby recommend to their belief what he had to say afterwards.
For he that truly states what things are discreditable to him and conceals none of
them, such as that he persecuted the Church, that he laid waste the faith, does
hereby cause the things that are honorable to him also to be above suspicion.
And consider the exceeding greatness of his humility. For having said, "and

last of all He appeared to me also," he was not content with this: "For many that
are last shall be first," says He, "and the first last." [Matthew 20:16] Therefore
he added, "as unto one born out of due time." Neither did he stop here, but adds
also his own judgment and with a reason, saying,

1 Corinthians 15:9
"For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle,
because I persecuted the Church of God."
And he said not, of the twelve alone, but also of all the other apostles. And
all these things he spoke, both as one speaking modestly and because he was
really so disposed as I said, making arrangements also beforehand for what was
intended to be spoken and rendering it more acceptable. For had he come
forward and said, "You ought to believe me that Christ rose from the dead; for I
saw Him and of all I am the most worthy of credit, inasmuch as I have labored
more," the expression might have offended the hearers: but now by first dwelling
on the humiliating topics and those which involve accusation, he both took off
what might be grating in such a narrative, and prepared the way for their belief
in his testimony.
On this account therefore neither does he simply, as I said, declare himself
to be the last and unworthy of the appellation of an apostle, but also states the
reason, saying, "because I persecuted the Church." And yet all those things were
forgiven, but nevertheless he himself never forgot them, desiring to signify the
greatness of God's favor: wherefore also he goes on to say,