known to all, that salvation is by faith, not by works of the law. And this is why
not to Jews only, but to Gentiles also the gift so given shall be proffered, and to
the latter rather than to the former. For "think not," says He, by any means, that
so it has come to pass in regard of this man alone; nay, so it shall be in regard of
the whole world. And this He said, prophesying of the Gentiles, and suggesting
to them good hopes. For in fact there were some following Him from Galilee of
the Gentiles. And this He said, on the one hand, not letting the Gentiles despair,
on the other, putting down the proud spirits of the Jews.
But that His saying might not affront the hearers, nor afford them any
handle; He neither brings forward prominently what He has to say of the
Gentiles, but upon occasion taken from the centurion; nor does He use nakedly
the term, Gentiles: not saying, "many of the Gentiles," but, "many from east and
west:" [Matthew 8:11] which was the language of one pointing out the Gentiles,
but did not so much affront the hearers, because His meaning was under a
shadow.
Neither in this way only does He soften the apparent novelty of His
doctrine, but also by speaking of "Abraham's bosom" instead of "the kingdom."
For neither was that term familiar to them: moreover, the introduction of
Abraham would be a sharper sting to them. Wherefore John also spoke nothing
at first concerning hell, but, what was most apt to grieve them, He says, "Think
not to say, we are children of Abraham." [Matthew 3:9]
He is providing for another point also; not to seem in any sense opposed to
the ancient polity. For he that admires the patriarchs, and speaks of their bosom
as an inheritance of blessings, does much more than sufficiently remove also this
suspicion.
Let no man therefore suppose that the threat is one only, for both the
punishment of the one and the joy of the other is double: of the one, not only that
they fell away, but that they fell away from their own; of the other, not only that
they attained, but that they attained what they had no expectation of: and there is
a third together with these, that the one received what pertained to the other. And

he calls them "children of the kingdom," for whom the kingdom had been
prepared: which also more than all was apt to gall them; in that having pointed to
them as being in their bosom by His offer and promise, after all He puts them
out.
6. Then, because what He had said was mere affirmation, He confirms it by
the miracle; as indeed He shows the miracles in their turn, by the subsequent
accomplishment of the prediction. He accordingly, who disbelieves the health
which the servant then received, let him from the prophecy, which has this day
come to pass, believe that other also. For so that prophecy again, even before the
event, was made manifest to all by the sign which then took place. To this end,
you see, having first uttered that prediction, then and not before He raised up the
sick of the palsy; that He might make the future credible by the present, and the
less by the greater. Since for virtuous men to enjoy His good things, and for the
contrary sort to undergo His penalties, were nothing improbable, but a
reasonable event, and according to the tenor of laws: but to brace up the feeble,
and to raise the dead, was something beyond nature.
But nevertheless, unto this great and marvellous work the centurion too
contributed no little; which thing, we see, Christ also declared, saying, "Go your
way, and as you have believed, so be it done unto you." Do you see how the
health of the servant proclaimed aloud both Christ's power, and the faith of the
centurion, and also became a pledge of the future? Or rather it was all a
proclamation of Christ's power. For not only did He quite heal the servant's body,
but the soul also of the centurion He did Himself bring over unto the faith by His
miracles.
And do thou look not to this only, that the one believed, and the other was
healed, but marvel how quickly also. For this too the evangelist declared, saying,
"And his servant was healed in the self-same hour:" even as of the leper also he
said, "he was straightway cleansed." For not by healing, but by doing so both in
a wonderful manner and in a moment of time, did He display His power. Neither
in this way only does He profit us, but also by his constant practice, in the