1 Corinthians 4:18
"Now some are puffed up, as though I were not coming unto you." For there
he glances both at them and at certain others, casting down their
highmindedness: since the love of preeminence is in fault, when men abuse the
absence of their teacher for their own self-will. For when he addresses himself
unto the people, observe how he does it by way of appeal to their sense of
shame; when unto the originators of the mischief, his manner is more vehement.
Thus unto the former he says, "We are the offscouring of all:" and soothing them
he says, "Not to shame you I write these things;" but to the latter, "Now as
though I were not coming to you, some are puffed up;" showing that their selfwill argued a childish turn of mind. For so boys in the absence of their master
wax more negligent.
This then is one thing here indicated; and another is that his presence was
sufficient for their correction. For as the presence of a lion makes all living
creatures shrink away, so also does that of Paul the corrupters of the Church.

1 Corinthians 4:19
And therefore he goes on, "But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will."
Now to say this only would seem to be mere threatening. But to promise himself
and demand from them the requisite proof by actions also; this was a course for
a truly high spirit. Accordingly he added this too, saying,
"And I will know, not the word of them which are puffed up, but the power."
For not from any excellencies of their own but from their teacher's absence, this
self-will arose. Which again itself was a mark of a scornful mind towards him.
And this is why, having said, "I have sent Timothy," he did not at once add, "I
will come;" but waited until he had brought his charge against them of being
"puffed up:" after that he says, "I will come." Since, had he put it before the
charge, it would rather have been an apology for himself as not having been
deficient, instead of a threat; nor even so ([οὕτως] so the King's ms. [οὖτος] the
rec. text.) would the statement have been convincing. But as it is, placing it after
the accusation, he rendered himself such as they would both believe and fear.
Mark also how solid and secure he makes his ground: for he says not
simply, "I will come:" but, "If the Lord will:" and he appoints no set time. For
since he might perhaps be tardy in coming, by that uncertainty he would fain
keep them anxiously engaged. And, lest they should hereupon fall back again, he
added, "shortly,"
3. "And I will know, not the word of them that are puffed up, but the power."
He said not, "I will know not the wisdom, nor the signs," but what? "not the
word:" by the term he employs at the same time depressing the one and exalting
the other. And for a while he is setting himself against the generality of them
who were countenancing the fornicator. For if he were speaking of him, he
would not say, "the power;" but, "the works," the corrupt works which he did.
Now why do you not seek after "the word?" "Not because I am wanting in