Reply to Objection 5: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. i, 8), these
three phrases denote the threefold being of creatures; first, their
being in the Word, denoted by the command "Let . . . be made";
secondly, their being in the angelic mind, signified by the words, "It
was . . . done"; thirdly, their being in their proper nature, by the
words, "He made." And because the formation of the angels is
recorded on the first day, it was not necessary there to add, "He
made." It may also be said, following other writers, that the words,
"He said," and "Let . . . be made," denote God's command, and the
words, "It was done," the fulfilment of that command. But as it was
necessary, for the sake of those especially who have asserted that
all visible things were made by the angels, to mention how things
were made, it is added, in order to remove that error, that God
Himself made them. Hence, in each work, after the words, "It was
done," some act of God is expressed by some such words as, "He
made," or, "He divided," or, "He called."
Reply to Objection 6: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. iv, 22,30),
by the "evening" and the "morning" are understood the evening and
the morning knowledge of the angels, which has been explained
(Question 58, Article 6,7). But, according to Basil (Hom. ii in
Hexaem.), the entire period takes its name, as is customary, from its
more important part, the day. And instance of this is found in the
words of Jacob, "The days of my pilgrimage," where night is not
mentioned at all. But the evening and the morning are mentioned as
being the ends of the day, since day begins with morning and ends
with evening, or because evening denotes the beginning of night,
and morning the beginning of day. It seems fitting, also, that where
the first distinction of creatures is described, divisions of time
should be denoted only by what marks their beginning. And the
reason for mentioning the evening first is that as the evening ends
the day, which begins with the light, the termination of the light at
evening precedes the termination of the darkness, which ends with
the morning. But Chrysostom's explanation is that thereby it is
intended to show that the natural day does not end with the evening,
but with the morning (Hom. v in Gen.).
Reply to Objection 7: The words "one day" are used when day is first
instituted, to denote that one day is made up of twenty-four hours.
Hence, by mentioning "one," the measure of a natural day is fixed.
Another reason may be to signify that a day is completed by the
return of the sun to the point from which it commenced its course.

And yet another, because at the completion of a week of seven days,
the first day returns which is one with the eighth day. The three
reasons assigned above are those given by Basil (Hom. ii in
Hexaem.).