FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.2.

also distinct.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 90, Article 2; Question 91,
Article 4), every law ordains human conduct to some end. Now
things ordained to an end may be divided in two ways, considered
from the point of view of the end. First, through being ordained to
different ends: and this difference will be specific, especially if such
ends are proximate. Secondly, by reason of being closely or
remotely connected with the end. Thus it is clear that movements
differ in species through being directed to different terms: while
according as one part of a movement is nearer to the term than
another part, the difference of perfect and imperfect movement is
assessed.
Accordingly then two laws may be distinguished from one another in
two ways. First, through being altogether diverse, from the fact that
they are ordained to diverse ends: thus a state-law ordained to
democratic government, would differ specifically from a law
ordained to government by the aristocracy. Secondly, two laws may
be distinguished from one another, through one of them being more
closely connected with the end, and the other more remotely: thus in
one and the same state there is one law enjoined on men of mature
age, who can forthwith accomplish that which pertains to the
common good; and another law regulating the education of children
who need to be taught how they are to achieve manly deeds later on.
We must therefore say that, according to the first way, the New Law
is not distinct from the Old Law: because they both have the same
end, namely, man's subjection to God; and there is but one God of
the New and of the Old Testament, according to Rm. 3:30: "It is one
God that justifieth circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through
faith." According to the second way, the New Law is distinct from the
Old Law: because the Old Law is like a pedagogue of children, as the
Apostle says (Gal. 3:24), whereas the New Law is the law of
perfection, since it is the law of charity, of which the Apostle says
(Col. 3:14) that it is "the bond of perfection."
Reply to Objection 1: The unity of faith under both Testaments
witnesses to the unity of end: for it has been stated above (Question
62, Article 2) that the object of the theological virtues, among which
is faith, is the last end. Yet faith had a different state in the Old and in
the New Law: since what they believed as future, we believe as fact.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: All the differences assigned between the Old
and New Laws are gathered from their relative perfection and
imperfection. For the precepts of every law prescribe acts of virtue.
Now the imperfect, who as yet are not possessed of a virtuous habit,
are directed in one way to perform virtuous acts, while those who are
perfected by the possession of virtuous habits are directed in
another way. For those who as yet are not endowed with virtuous
habits, are directed to the performance of virtuous acts by reason of
some outward cause: for instance, by the threat of punishment, or
the promise of some extrinsic rewards, such as honor, riches, or the
like. Hence the Old Law, which was given to men who were
imperfect, that is, who had not yet received spiritual grace, was
called the "law of fear," inasmuch as it induced men to observe its
commandments by threatening them with penalties; and is spoken of
as containing temporal promises. On the other hand, those who are
possessed of virtue, are inclined to do virtuous deeds through love
of virtue, not on account of some extrinsic punishment or reward.
Hence the New Law which derives its pre-eminence from the spiritual
grace instilled into our hearts, is called the "Law of love": and it is
described as containing spiritual and eternal promises, which are
objects of the virtues, chiefly of charity. Accordingly such persons
are inclined of themselves to those objects, not as to something
foreign but as to something of their own. For this reason, too, the
Old Law is described as "restraining the hand, not the will" [Peter
Lombard, Sent. iii, D, 40]; since when a man refrains from some sins
through fear of being punished, his will does not shrink simply from
sin, as does the will of a man who refrains from sin through love of
righteousness: and hence the New Law, which is the Law of love, is
said to restrain the will.
Nevertheless there were some in the state of the Old Testament who,
having charity and the grace of the Holy Ghost, looked chiefly to
spiritual and eternal promises: and in this respect they belonged to
the New Law. In like manner in the New Testament there are some
carnal men who have not yet attained to the perfection of the New
Law; and these it was necessary, even under the New Testament, to
lead to virtuous action by the fear of punishment and by temporal
promises.
But although the Old Law contained precepts of charity,
nevertheless it did not confer the Holy Ghost by Whom "charity . . . is
spread abroad in our hearts" (Rm. 5:5).