"Does then the Scripture speak falsely?" God forbid! But they do foolishly,
who neglect to examine with due exactness all things written. For if this on the
one hand be acknowledged, that the Scriptures cannot lie; and this on the other
hand proved, that not all wealth is from God; the weakness of inconsiderate
readers is the cause of the difficulty.
10. Now it were right for us to dismiss you, having herein exculpated the
Scripture, that you may suffer this punishment at our hands for your negligence
concerning the Scriptures: but because I greatly spare you and cannot any longer
bear to look on you confused and disturbed, let us also add the solution, having
first mentioned the speaker, and when it was spoken, and to whom. For not alike
to all does God speak, as neither do we deal alike with children and men. When
then was it spoken, and by whom, and to whom? By Solomon in the Old
Testament to the Jews, who knew no other than things of sense, and by these
proved the power of God. For these are they who say, "Can He give bread also?"
and, "What sign showest Thou unto us? Our fathers did eat manna in the desert:
— whose God is their belly." [Psalm 78:24; Matthew 12:38; John 6:31;
Philippians 3:19] Since then they were proving Him by these things, He says to
them, "This is also possible with God to make both rich and poor;" not that it is
of course He Himself who makes them, but that He can, when He will. Just as
when he says, "Who rebukes the sea, and makes it dry, and dries up all the
rivers," [Nahum 1:4] and yet this was never done. How then does the prophet
say so? Not as though it were a doing always, but as a thing that was possible for
Him to do.
What kind of poverty then does He give, and what kind of wealth?
Remember the patriarch, and you shall know the kind of wealth that is given by
God. For He made both Abraham rich, and after him Job, even as Job himself
says; "If we have received good from the Lord, shall we not also receive evil?"
[Job 2:10] And the wealth of Jacob thence had its beginning. There is also a
poverty which comes from Him, that which is commended, such as He once
would have introduced to the knowledge of that rich man, saying, "If you would

be perfect, sell your goods, and give to the poor, and come, follow Me."
[Matthew 19:21] And to the disciples again, making a law and saying, "Provide
neither gold, nor silver, nor two coats." [Matthew 9:10] Say not then that all
wealth is His gift: seeing that cases have been pointed out of its being collected
both by murderers, and by rapine, and by ten thousand other devices.
But again the discourse reverts to our former question: viz. "if the rich are
no way useful to us, wherefore are they made rich?" What then must we say?
That these are not useful who so make themselves rich; whereas those surely
who are made so by God are in the highest degree useful. And do thou learn this
from the very things done by those whom we just now mentioned. Thus
Abraham possessed wealth for all strangers, and for all in need. For he who on
the approach of three men, as he supposed, sacrificed a calf and kneaded three
measures of fine flour, and that while sitting in his door in the heat of the day;
consider with what liberality and readiness he used to spend his substance on all,
together with his goods giving also the service of his body, and this at such an
advanced age; being a harbor to strangers, to all who had come to any kind of
want, and possessing nothing as his own, not even his son: since at God's
command he actually delivered up even him; and along with his son he gave up
also himself and all his house, when he hastened to snatch his brother's son out
of danger; and this he did not for lucre's sake, but of mere humanity. When, for
instance, they who were saved by him would put the spoils at his disposal, he
rejected all, even to "a thread and a shoe-latchet." [Genesis 14:23]
Such also was the blessed Job. "For my door," says, was open to every one
who came: [Job 20:15] "I was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: I was a
father of the helpless, the stranger lodged not without, and the helpless,
whatever need they had, failed not of it, neither suffered I one helpless man to go
out of my door with a empty bosom." And much more too than these, that we
may not now recount all, he continued to do, spending all his wealth on the
needy.
Will you also look upon those who have become rich but not of God, that