be it known unto you, O king, that we serve not your gods." [Daniel 3:18] For
had they said, "Sins are the cause of His not delivering us, should He fail to
deliver," they would not have been believed. Wherefore in this place they are
silent on that subject, though they speak of it in the furnace, again and again
alleging their sins. But before the king they say no such thing; only, that though
they were to be burnt, they would not give up their religion.
For it was not for rewards and recompenses that they did what they did, but
out of love alone; and yet they were in captivity too, and in slavery, and had
enjoyed no good thing. Yea, they had lost their country, and their freedom, and
all their possessions. For tell me not of their honors in the king's courts, for holy
and righteous as they were, they would have chosen ten thousand times rather to
have been beggars at home, and to have been partakers of the blessings in the
temple. "For I had rather," it is said, "be an outcast in the house of my God, than
to dwell in the tents of sinners." And "one day in your courts is better than
thousands." They would have chosen then ten thousand times rather to be
outcasts at home, than kings in Babylon. And this is manifest, from what they
declare even in the furnace, grieving at their continuance in that country. For
although themselves enjoyed great honors, yet seeing the calamities of the rest
they were exceedingly vexed; and this kind of thing is most especially
characteristic of saints, that no glory, nor honor, nor anything else should be
more precious to them than their neighbor's welfare. See, for example, how even
when they were in a furnace, they made their supplication for all the people. But
we not even when at large bear our brethren in mind. And again, when they were
inquiring about the dreams, [Daniel 2:17-18] they were looking "not to their own
but the common good," for that they despised death they showed by many things
afterwards. But everywhere they put themselves forward, as wishing to prevail
with God by importunity. Next, as not accounting themselves either to be
sufficient, they flee to the Fathers; but of themselves they said that they offer
nothing more than "a contrite spirit."
19. These men then let us also imitate. Because now too there is set up a

golden image, even the tyranny of Mammon. But let us not give heed to the
timbrels, nor to the flutes, nor to the harps, nor to the rest of the pomp of riches;
yea, though we must needs fall into a furnace of poverty, let us choose it, rather
than worship that idol, and there will be "in the midst a moist whistling wind."
Let us not then shudder at hearing of "a furnace of poverty." For so too at that
time they that fell into the furnace were shown the more glorious, but they that
worshipped were destroyed. Only then all took place at once, but in this case
some part will be accomplished here, some there, some both here and in the day
that is to come. For they that have chosen poverty, in order that they might not
worship mammon, will be more glorious both here and then, but they that have
been rich unjustly here, shall then pay the utmost penalty.
From this furnace Lazarus too went forth, not less glorious than those
children; but the rich man who was in the place of them that worshipped the
image, was condemned to hell. For indeed what we have now mentioned was a
type of this. Wherefore as in this instance they who fell into the furnace suffered
no hurt, but they who sat without were laid hold of with great fierceness, so
likewise shall it be then. The saints walking through the river of fire shall suffer
no pain, nay they will even appear joyous; but they that have worshipped the
image, shall see the fire rest upon them fiercer than any wild beast, and draw
them in. So that if any one disbelieves hell, when he sees this furnace, let him
from the things present believe things to come, and fear not the furnace of
poverty, but the furnace of sin. For this is flame and torment, but that, dew and
refreshment; and by this stands the devil, by that, angels wafting aside the flame.
20. These things let them hear that are rich, that are kindling the furnace of
poverty. For though they shall not hurt those others, "the dew" coming to their
aid; yet themselves they will render an easy prey to the flame, which they have
kindled with their own hands.
Then, an angel went down with those children; now, let us go down with
them that are in the furnace of poverty, and by almsdeeds let us make a "dewy
air," and waft the flame quite aside, that we may be partakers of their crowns