SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the different kinds of almsdeeds are

suitably enumerated?
Objection 1: It would seem that the different kinds of almsdeeds are
unsuitably enumerated. For we reckon seven corporal almsdeeds,
namely, to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the
naked, to harbor the harborless, to visit the sick, to ransom the
captive, to bury the dead; all of which are expressed in the following
verse: "To visit, to quench, to feed, to ransom, clothe, harbor or
bury."
Again we reckon seven spiritual alms, namely, to instruct the
ignorant, to counsel the doubtful, to comfort the sorrowful, to
reprove the sinner, to forgive injuries, to bear with those who trouble
and annoy us, and to pray for all, which are all contained in the
following verse: "To counsel, reprove, console, to pardon, forbear,
and to pray," yet so that counsel includes both advice and
instruction.
And it seems that these various almsdeeds are unsuitably
enumerated. For the purpose of almsdeeds is to succor our
neighbor. But a dead man profits nothing by being buried, else Our
Lord would not have spoken truly when He said (Mt. 10:28): "Be not
afraid of them who kill the body, and after that have no more that
they can do." This explains why Our Lord, in enumerating the works
of mercy, made no mention of the burial of the dead (Mt. 25:35,36).
Therefore it seems that these almsdeeds are unsuitably enumerated.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Article 1), the purpose of
giving alms is to relieve our neighbor's need. Now there are many
needs of human life other than those mentioned above, for instance,
a blind man needs a leader, a lame man needs someone to lean on, a
poor man needs riches. Therefore these almsdeeds are unsuitably
enumerated.
Objection 3: Further, almsgiving is a work of mercy. But the reproof
of the wrong-doer savors, apparently, of severity rather than of
mercy. Therefore it ought not to be reckoned among the spiritual
almsdeeds.
Objection 4: Further, almsgiving is intended for the supply of a

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.3.

defect. But no man is without the defect of ignorance in some matter
or other. Therefore, apparently, each one ought to instruct anyone
who is ignorant of what he knows himself.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Nom. in Evang. ix): "Let him that hath
understanding beware lest he withhold his knowledge; let him that
hath abundance of wealth, watch lest he slacken his merciful bounty;
let him who is a servant to art be most solicitous to share his skill
and profit with his neighbor; let him who has an opportunity of
speaking with the wealthy, fear lest he be condemned for retaining
his talent, if when he has the chance he plead not with him the cause
of the poor." Therefore the aforesaid almsdeeds are suitably
enumerated in respect of those things whereof men have abundance
or insufficiency.
I answer that, The aforesaid distinction of almsdeeds is suitably
taken from the various needs of our neighbor: some of which affect
the soul, and are relieved by spiritual almsdeeds, while others affect
the body, and are relieved by corporal almsdeeds. For corporal need
occurs either during this life or afterwards. If it occurs during this
life, it is either a common need in respect of things needed by all, or
it is a special need occurring through some accident supervening. In
the first case, the need is either internal or external. Internal need is
twofold: one which is relieved by solid food, viz. hunger, in respect
of which we have "to feed the hungry"; while the other is relieved by
liquid food, viz. thirst, and in respect of this we have "to give drink to
the thirsty." The common need with regard to external help is
twofold; one in respect of clothing, and as to this we have "to clothe
the naked": while the other is in respect of a dwelling place, and as
to this we have "to harbor the harborless." Again if the need be
special, it is either the result of an internal cause, like sickness, and
then we have "to visit the sick," or it results from an external cause,
and then we have "to ransom the captive." After this life we give
"burial to the dead."
In like manner spiritual needs are relieved by spiritual acts in two
ways, first by asking for help from God, and in this respect we have
"prayer," whereby one man prays for others; secondly, by giving
human assistance, and this in three ways. First, in order to relieve a
deficiency on the part of the intellect, and if this deficiency be in the
speculative intellect, the remedy is applied by "instructing," and if in
the practical intellect, the remedy is applied by "counselling."
Secondly, there may be a deficiency on the part of the appetitive