as far as Philippi, but no more after that. "And receiving," it says, "a
commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him with all speed, they
departed." [Acts 17:15] For though he was a Paul, nevertheless he needed them.
And with good reason are they urged by God to go into Macedonia, for there lay
Greece moreover bright (before them). [Acts 16:9]
See what zeal the rest of the disciples showed with respect to their leaders:
not as it is now with us, who are separated and divided into great and small:
some of us exalted, while others are envious: for this is the reason why those are
envious, because we are puffed up, because we will not endure to be put upon a
par with them. The reason why there is harmony in the body, is because there is
no puffing up: and there is no puffing up, because the members are of necessity
made to stand in need of each other, and the head has need of the feet. And God
has made this to be the case with us, and, for all that, we will not endure it:
although even without this, there ought to be love among us. Hear ye not how
they that are without accuse us when they say, "Needs make friendships?" The
laity have need of us; and we again exist for them. Since teacher or ruler would
not exist, if there were not persons to be taught, nor would he perform his part,
for it would not be possible. As the land has need of the husbandman, and the
husbandman of the land, so is it here. What reward is there for the teacher to
receive, when he has none to produce that he has taught? And what for the
taught, who have not had the benefit of the best teaching? So that we need each
other alike in turn, both the governed, them that govern, and leaders, them that
obey: for rulers are for the sake of many. Since no one is sufficient to do
anything by himself alone, whether need be to ordain ([χειροτονἥσαι]), or to
examine men's counsels and opinions, but they become more honorable by
assembly and numbers. For instance, the poor need givers, the givers again need
receivers. "Considering one another" he says, "to provoke unto love and to good
works." [Hebrews 10:24] On this account the assembly of the whole Church has
more power: and what each cannot do by himself singly, he is able to do when
joined with the rest. Therefore most necessary are the prayers offered up, here,

for the world, for the Church, from the one end of the earth to the other, for
peace, for those who are in adversities. And Paul shows this when he says, "That
for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be given
by many on our behalf" [2 Corinthians 1:11]; that is, that He might confer the
favor on many. And often he asks for their prayers. See also what God says with
regard to the Ninevites: "And shall not I spare that city, wherein dwell more than
six score thousand persons?" [Jonah 4:11] For if, "where two or three," He says,
"are gathered together in My Name" [Matthew 18:20], they prevail much, how
much more, being many? And yet you may prevail, though thou be but one; yet
not equally so. For why are you but one? Why do you not make many? Why do
you not become the maker of love? Why do you not create ([κατασκευάζεις])
friendship? Thou lackest the chief excellence of virtue. For as men's being bad
by agreement together more provokes God; so for men to be good by unanimity
delights Him more. "You shall not follow a multitude," He says, "to do evil."
[Exodus 23:2] "They are all gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable" [Romans 3:12], and have become as it were men singing in concert
in their wickedness. Make for yourself friends in preference to domestics, and all
besides. If the peacemaker is a son of God, how much more he who makes
friends also? [Matthew 5:9] If he who reconciles only is called a son of God, of
what shall not he be worthy, who makes friends of those who are reconciled? Let
us engage ourselves in this trade, let us make those who are enemies to each
other friends, and those who are not indeed enemies, but are not friends, them let
us bring together, and before all, our own selves. For as he who is at enmity in
his house, and has differences with his wife, carries no authority when
reconciling others, but will be told, "Physician, heal yourself" [Luke 4:23], so
will a man be told in this case. What then is the enmity that is in us? That of the
soul against the body, that of vice against virtue. This enmity let us put an end to,
this war let us take away, and then being in peace we shall also address others
with much boldness of speech, our conscience not accusing us. Anger fights
against gentleness, love of money against contempt of it, envy against goodness