It follows that since, properly speaking, we can only abstract objects united in existence, there are
two sorts of abstraction corresponding to the two modes of union mentioned above, namely, the
union of part and whole, and the union of form and matter. The first is that in which we abstract
form from matter, and the second is that in which we abstract a whole from its parts.

Now a form can be abstracted from matter if the essential nature of the form does not depend on
that particular kind of matter; but the intellect cannot abstract form from the kind of matter upon
which the form depends according to its essential nature. Consequently, because all accidents are
related to the underlying substance as form to matter, and because it is the nature of every
accident to depend upon substance, no form of this kind can be separated from substance. But
accidents befall substance in a definite order. Quantity comes to it first, then quality, after that
passivities (passiones) and actions. So quantity can be thought of in substance before the
sensible qualities (because of which matter is called sensible) are considered in it. Quantity, then,
according to its essential nature does not depend upon sensible matter but only upon intelligible
matter. For, after accidents have been abstracted, substance is intelligible only to the intellect,
because it is beyond the sense powers to comprehend substance. And abstract objects of this
kind are the concern of mathematics; it treats of quantities and the properties of quantity, such as
figures and the like.

Moreover, we cannot abstract a whole from just any parts. For there are some parts upon which
the nature of the whole depends, namely, when the being of a particular whole consists in the
composition of particular parts. It is in this way that a syllable is related to letters and a mixed
body to the elements. Parts of this sort, which are necessary for understanding the whole because
they enter into its definition, are called parts of the species and of the form. There are some parts,
however, that are accidental to the whole as such. The semicircle, for instance, is related to the
circle in this way, for it is accidental to a circle that it be divided into two or more equal or
unequal parts. But it is not accidental to a triangle that three lines are designated in it, for because
of this a triangle is a triangle. Similarly, it is an essential characteristic of man that there be found
in him a rational soul and a body composed of the four elements. So man cannot be understood
without these parts and they must be included in his definition; so they are parts of his species
and form. But finger, foot, and hand, and other parts of this kind are outside the definition of
man; and thus the essential nature of man does not depend on them and he can be understood
without them. For whether or not he has feet, as long as he is constituted of a rational soul and a
body composed of the elements in the proper mixture required by this sort of form, he will be a
man. These parts are called parts of matter: they are not included in the definition of the whole,
but rather the converse is true. This is how all determinate (signatae) parts are related to man; for