SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.4.

that preaching which is addressed, not publicly to the people, but to
one or a few in particular by way of private admonishment. Hence he
says expressly: "If one has to speak." For according to a gloss on 1
Cor. 2:4, "Speech is addressed privately, preaching to many."
Reply to Objection 4: Those who despise all for God's sake are
bound to work with their hands, when they have no other means of
livelihood, or of almsgiving (should the case occur where almsgiving
were a matter of precept), but not otherwise, as stated in the Article.
It is in this sense that the gloss quoted is to be understood.
Reply to Objection 5: That the apostles worked with their hands was
sometimes a matter of necessity, sometimes a work of
supererogation. It was of necessity when they failed to receive a
livelihood from others. Hence a gloss on 1 Cor. 4:12, "We labor,
working with our own hands," adds, "because no man giveth to us."
It was supererogation, as appears from 1 Cor. 9:12, where the
Apostle says that he did not use the power he had of living by the
Gospel. The Apostle had recourse to this supererogation for three
motives. First, in order to deprive the false apostles of the pretext for
preaching, for they preached merely for a temporal advantage; hence
he says (2 Cor. 11:12): "But what I do, that I will do that I may cut off
the occasion from them," etc. Secondly, in order to avoid burdening
those to whom he preached; hence he says (2 Cor. 12:13): "What is
there that you have had less than the other churches, but that I
myself was not burthensome to you?" Thirdly, in order to give an
example of work to the idle; hence he says (2 Thess. 3:8,9): "We
worked night and day . . . that we might give ourselves a pattern unto
you, to imitate us." However, the Apostle did not do this in places
like Athens where he had facilities for preaching daily, as Augustine
observes (De oper. Monach. xviii). Yet religious are not for this
reason bound to imitate the Apostle in this matter, since they are not
bound to all works of supererogation: wherefore neither did the other
apostles work with their hands.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is lawful for religious to live on alms?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for religious to live on alms. For
the Apostle (1 Tim. 5:16) forbids those widows who have other
means of livelihood to live on the alms of the Church, so that the
Church may have "sufficient for them that are widows indeed." And
Jerome says to Pope Damasus [Can. Clericos, cause. i, qu. 2; Can.
Quoniam, cause xvi, qu. 1; Regul. Monach. iv among the
supposititious works of St. Jerome] that "those who have sufficient
income from their parents and their own possessions, if they take
what belongs to the poor they commit and incur the guilt of
sacrilege, and by the abuse of such things they eat and drink
judgment to themselves." Now religious if they be able-bodied can
support themselves by the work of their hands. Therefore it would
seem that they sin if they consume the alms belonging to the poor.
Objection 2: Further, to live at the expense of the faithful is the
stipend appointed to those who preach the Gospel in payment of
their labor or work, according to Mt. 10:10: "The workman is worthy
of his meat." Now it belongs not to religious to preach the Gospel,
but chiefly to prelates who are pastors and teachers. Therefore
religious cannot lawfully live on the alms of the faithful.
Objection 3: Further, religious are in the state of perfection. But it is
more perfect to give than to receive alms; for it is written (Acts
20:35): "It is a more blessed thing to give, rather than to receive."
Therefore they should not live on alms, but rather should they give
alms of their handiwork.
Objection 4: Further, it belongs to religious to avoid obstacles to
virtue and occasions of sin. Now the receiving of alms offers an
occasion of sin, and hinders an act of virtue; hence a gloss on 2
Thess. 3:9, "That we might give ourselves a pattern unto you," says:
"He who through idleness eats often at another's table, must needs
flatter the one who feeds him." It is also written (Ex. 23:8): "Neither
shalt thou take bribes which . . . blind the wise, and pervert the
words of the just," and (Prov. 22:7): "The borrower is servant to him
that lendeth." This is contrary to religion, wherefore a gloss on 2
Thess. 3:9, "That we might give ourselves a pattern," etc., says, "our
religion calls men to liberty." Therefore it would seem that religious
should not live on alms.