Thus by means of this Marian Year the Church is called not only to remember everything
in her past that testifies to the special maternal cooperation of the Mother of God in the
work of salvation in Christ the lord, but also, on her own part, to prepare for the future
the paths of this cooperation. For the end of the second Christian Millennium opens up as
a new prospect.

50. As has already been mentioned, also among our divided brethren many honor and
celebrate the Mother of the Lord, especially among the Orientals. It is a Marian light cast
upon ecumenism. In particular, I wish to mention once more that during the Marian Year
there will occur the Millennium of the Baptism of Saint Vladimir, Grand Duke of Kiev
[988]. This marked the beginning of Christianity in the territories of what was then called
Rus', and subsequently in other territories of Eastern Europe. In this way, through the
work of evangelization, Christianity spread beyond Europe, as far as the northern
territories of the Asian continent. We would therefore like, especially during this Year, to
join in prayer with all those who are celebrating the Millennium of this Baptism, both
Orthodox and Catholics, repeating and confirming with the Council those sentiments of
joy and comfort that "the Easterners...with ardent emotion and devout mind concur in
reverencing the Mother of God, ever Virgin." Even though we are still experiencing
the painful effects of the separation which took place some decades later [1054], we can
say that in the presence of the Mother of Christ we feel that we are true brothers and
sisters within that messianic People, which is called to be the one family of God on earth.
As I announced at the beginning of the New Year "We desire to reconfirm this universal
inheritance of all the Sons and daughters of this earth."

In announcing the Year of Mary, I also indicated that it will end next year on the
Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin into heaven, in order to emphasize
the "great sign in heaven" spoken of by the Apocalypse. In this way we also wish to
respond to the exhortation of the Council, which looks to Mary as "a sign of sure hope
and solace for the pilgrim People of God." And the Council expresses this exhortation in
the following words: "Let the entire body of the faithful pour forth persevering prayer to
the Mother of God and Mother of mankind. Let them implore that she who aided the
beginning of the Church by her prayers may now, exalted as she is in heaven above all
the saints and angels, intercede with her Son in the fellowship of all the saints. May she
do so until all the peoples of the human family, whether they are honored with the name
of Christian or whether they still do not know their Savior, are happily gathered together
in peace and harmony into the one People of God, for the glory of the Most Holy and
Undivided Trinity."