the day and night, so many the kinds of brute animals, and plants, and seeds, and
herbs, that preserve their course, and yet, to the present day, none has ever fallen
into decay or sudden dissolution.
10. We might continue to speak not only of these things, but also of many
others, which are even more profound; and might moralise even upon the
Creation itself; but reserving these subjects for the morrow, let us earnestly
endeavour to retain what has been said, and to convey it to the rest. I know
indeed, that the abstruseness of these speculations has seemed strange to your
ears; but if we be a little vigilant, and accustom ourselves to them, we shall
easily be able to teach others. Meanwhile, it is necessary farther to say this to
your Charity. Even as God has given us glory by means of this great creation, so
let us also glorify Him by a pure conversation! "The heavens declare the glory of
God," though only seen; and we therefore should declare God's glory not only in
speaking, but in silence, and in astonishing all men by the brightness of our life.
For He says, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." [Matthew 5:16] For when an
unbeliever beholds you, who art a believer, subdued, modest, and orderly in
manners, he will wonder and say, "Truly great is the God of the Christians! What
manner of men has He formed? What, and from what has He made them? Hath
He turned them from men into angels? If any one treats them contemptuously,
they revile not! If any one beats them, they are not enraged! If any one does them
an injury, they pray for him who has put them in pain! They have no enemy!
They know nothing of cherishing malice! They are guiltless of vain babbling!
They have not learned to utter a falsehood! They cannot endure a false oath, or
rather, they swear not at all, but would prefer to have their tongue cut out, rather
than to let an oath proceed out of their mouth!" Such are the things which we
should give them cause to say of us; and we should exterminate our evil habit of
oaths, and pay at least as much honour to God, as we do to our more valuable
garments. For how truly absurd is it, that when we have one garment better than
the rest, we do not suffer ourselves to be continually wearing it; and yet

everywhere we draggle about the name of God without concern, or ceremony!
Let us not, I earnestly pray and beseech you, let us not thus despise our own
salvation; but the care which we have used respecting this precept from the
beginning, let us carry on even to the end. For I thus continually exhort you on
the subject of oaths, not as though condemning you of listlessness, but inasmuch
as I have seen that you are for the most part reformed, I press you, and am
urgent, that the whole work should be finished off, and come to its perfection.
Even so act the spectators of public games. They excite those who are near the
prize, with the more vehemence. Let us, then, by no means become weary; for
we have nearly reached the completion of this amendment; and the difficulty
was at the beginning. But now that the greater part of the evil habit has been cut
away, and less remains to correct, no labour is necessary, but we only need a
moderate degree of watchfulness, and diligence for some short time, in order that
we ourselves being amended, may also become instructors to others; and that we
may behold the Holy Passover with much confidence, and that with much
pleasure we may reap a double or treble measure of the customary gladness of
the festival. For not so much does it delight us to be delivered from the toil and
fatigue of fasting, as to meet that holy season with an illustrious and well-earned
crown; a crown indeed that is never to fade!
11. But in order that the amendment may take place the more quickly, do
this which I tell you. Inscribe upon the wall of your house, and upon the wall of
your heart, that "flying sickle;" and think that it is flying forth on occasion of the
curse, and constantly remember it. And if you observe another person swearing,
restrain, forbid, and be careful for him, and be careful for your own domestics.
For if we would look to this, that we might not merely correct ourselves, but also
bring others to the same point, we shall ourselves quickly arrive at the goal;
since while we undertake to instruct others, we shall be ashamed and blush,
should we in our own case seem to leave those things unperformed, which we
enjoin upon them. There is no need to say more; for much has been already
spoken on these matters; and these things are now said only by way of