SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.5.

when praying, from Whom we seek to obtain what we pray for,
because by so doing we confess that He is the Author of our goods:
but not to those whom we call upon as our advocates in God's
presence.
Reply to Objection 2: The dead, if we consider their natural
condition, do not know what takes place in this world, especially the
interior movements of the heart. Nevertheless, according to Gregory
(Moral. xii, 21), whatever it is fitting the blessed should know about
what happens to us, even as regards the interior movements of the
heart, is made known to them in the Word: and it is most becoming
to their exalted position that they should know the petitions we make
to them by word or thought; and consequently the petitions which
we raise to them are known to them through Divine manifestation.
Reply to Objection 3: Those who are in this world or in Purgatory, do
not yet enjoy the vision of the Word, so as to be able to know what
we think or say. Wherefore we do not seek their assistance by
praying to them, but ask it of the living by speaking to them.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether we ought to ask for something definite

when we pray?
Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to ask for anything
definite when we pray to God. According to Damascene (De Fide
Orth. iii, 24), "to pray is to ask becoming things of God"; wherefore it
is useless to pray for what is inexpedient, according to James 4:3,
"You ask, and receive not: because you ask amiss." Now according
to Rm. 8:26, "we know not what we should pray for as we ought."
Therefore we ought not to ask for anything definite when we pray.
Objection 2: Further, those who ask another person for something
definite strive to incline his will to do what they wish themselves. But
we ought not to endeavor to make God will what we will; on the
contrary, we ought to strive to will what He wills, according to a
gloss on Ps. 32:1, "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye just." Therefore we
ought not to ask God for anything definite when we pray.
Objection 3: Further, evil things are not to be sought from God; and
as to good things, God Himself invites us to take them. Now it is
useless to ask a person to give you what he invites you to take.
Therefore we ought not to ask God for anything definite in our
prayers.
On the contrary, our Lord (Mt. 6 and Lk. 11) taught His disciples to
ask definitely for those things which are contained in the petitions of
the Lord's Prayer.
I answer that, According to Valerius Maximus [Fact. et Dict. Memor.
vii, 2], "Socrates deemed that we should ask the immortal gods for
nothing else but that they should grant us good things, because they
at any rate know what is good for each one whereas when we pray
we frequently ask for what it had been better for us not to obtain."
This opinion is true to a certain extent, as to those things which may
have an evil result, and which man may use ill or well, such as
"riches, by which," as stated by the same authority (Fact. et Dict.
Memor. vii, 2), "many have come to an evil end; honors, which have
ruined many; power, of which we frequently witness the unhappy
results; splendid marriages, which sometimes bring about the total
wreck of a family." Nevertheless there are certain goods which man
cannot ill use, because they cannot have an evil result. Such are