affinity by character; which Christ also declared, when He said, "If you were
Abraham's children, you would do the works of Abraham;" [John 8:39] not
depriving them of their kindred according to the flesh, but teaching them to seek
after that affinity which is greater than it, and more real.
This then He establishes here also, but in a manner less invidious, and more
measured, as became Him speaking to His mother. For He said not at all, "She is
not my mother, nor are those my brethren, because they do not my will;" neither
did He declare and pronounce judgment against them; but He yet left in it their
own power to choose, speaking with the gentleness that becomes Him.
"For he that does," says He, "the will of my Father, this is my brother, and
sister, and mother."
Wherefore if they desire to be such, let them come this way. And when the
woman again cried out, saying, "Blessed is the womb that bare You," He said
not, "She is not my mother," but, "If she wishes to be blessed, let her do the will
of my Father. For such a one is both brother, and sister, and mother."
Oh honor! Oh virtue! Unto what a height does she lead up him that follows
after her! How many women have blessed that holy Virgin, and her womb, and
prayed that they might become such mothers, and give up all! What then is there
to hinder? For behold, He has marked out a spacious road for us; and it is
granted not to women only, but to men also, to be of this rank, or rather of one
yet far higher. For this makes one His mother much more, than those pangs did.
So that if that were a subject for blessing, much more this, inasmuch as it is also
more real. Do not therefore merely desire, but also in the way that leads you to
your desire walk thou with much diligence.
3. Having then said these words, "He came out of the house." Do you see,
how He both rebuked them, and did what they desired? Which He did also at the
marriage. [John 2:1-11] For there too He at once reproved her asking
unseasonably, and nevertheless did not gainsay her; by the former correcting her
weakness, by the latter showing His kindly feeling toward His mother. So
likewise on this occasion too, He both healed the disease of vainglory, and

rendered the due honor to His mother, even though her request was
unseasonable. For, "in the same day," it is said, "went Jesus out of the house, and
sat by the sea side."
Why, if you desire, says He, to see and hear, behold I come forth and
discourse. Thus having wrought many miracles, He affords again the benefit of
His doctrine. And He "sits by the sea," fishing and getting into His net them that
are on the land.
But He "sat by the sea," not without a purpose; and this very thing the
evangelist has darkly expressed. For to indicate that the cause of His doing this
was a desire to order His auditory with exactness, and to leave no one behind His
back, but to have all face to face,
"And great multitudes," says He, "were gathered together unto Him, so that
He went into a ship and sat, and the whole multitude stood on the shore."
And having sat down there, He speaks by parables.
"And He spoke," it says, "many things unto them in parables."
[Matthew 13:3]
And yet on the mount, we know, He did no such thing, neither did He
weave His discourse with so many parables, for then there were multitudes only,
and a simple people; but here are also Scribes and Pharisees.
But do thou mark, I pray you, what kind of parable He speaks first, and how
Matthew puts them in their order. Which then does He speak first? That which it
was most necessary to speak first, that which makes the hearer more attentive.
For because He was to discourse unto them in dark sayings, He thoroughly
rouses His hearers' mind first by His parable. Therefore also another evangelist
says that He reproved them, because they do not understand; saying, "How knew
ye not the parable?" But not for this cause only does He speak in parables, but
that He may also make His discourse more vivid, and fix the memory of it in
them more perfectly, and bring the things before their sight. In like manner do
the prophets also.
4. What then is the parable? "Behold," says He, "a sower went forth to