he had often loathed, he intreats may become a comfort to him then. I exhort you
therefore, that although no one see what we do, yet that each of us enter into his
own conscience, and set reason for his judge, and bring forward his
transgressions, and if he desire them not to be exposed to public view then in
that fearful day, let him now heal his wounds, let him apply to them the
medicines of repentance. For it is in the power, yea, it is in the power of one full
of ten thousand wounds to go hence whole. For "if you forgive," He says, "your
sins are forgiven unto you." [Matthew 6:14, not verbally quoted] For as sins
buried in Baptism appear no more, so these also shall disappear, if we be willing
to repent. And repentance is the not doing the same again; for he that again puts
his hand to the same, is like the dog that returns to his own vomit, and like him
in the proverb who cards wool into the fire, and draws water into a cask full of
holes. It behooves therefore to depart both in action and in thought from what we
have dared to do, and having departed, to apply to the wounds the remedies
which are the contraries of our sins. For instance: have you been grasping and
covetous? Abstain from rapine, and apply almsgiving to the wound. Have you
been a fornicator? Abstain from fornication, and apply chastity to the wound.
Have you spoken ill of your brother, and injured him? Cease finding fault, and
apply kindness. Let us thus act with respect to each point in which we have
offended, and let us not carelessly pass by our sins, for there awaits us hereafter,
there awaits us a season of account. Wherefore also Paul said, "The Lord is at
hand: be careful for nothing." [Philippians 4:5-6] But we perhaps must add the
contrary of this, "The Lord is at hand, be careful." For they might well hear, "Be
careful for nothing," living as they did in affliction, and labors, and trials; but
they who live by rapine, or in luxury, and who shall give a grievous reckoning,
would in reason hear not this, but that other, "The Lord is at hand, be careful."
Since no long time now remains until the consummation, but the world is
hastening to its end; this the wars declare, this the afflictions, this the
earthquakes, this the love which has waxed cold. For as the body when in its last
gasp and near to death, draws to itself ten thousand sufferings; and as when a

house is about to fall, many portions are wont to fall beforehand from the roof
and walls; so is the end of the world near and at the very doors, and therefore ten
thousand woes are everywhere scattered abroad. If the Lord was then "at hand,"
much more is He now "at hand." If three hundred years ago, when those words
were used, Paul called that season "the fullness of time," much more would he
have called the present so. But perhaps for this very reason some disbelieve, yet
they ought on this account to believe the more. For whence do you know, O
man, that the end is not "at hand," and the words shortly to be accomplished?
For as we speak of the end of the year not as being the last day, but also the last
month, though it has thirty days; so if of so many years I call even four hundred
years "the end," I shall not be wrong; and so at that time Paul spoke of the end
by anticipation. Let us then set ourselves in order, let us delight in the fear of
God; for if we live here without fear of Him, His coming will surprise us
suddenly, when we are neither careful, nor looking for Him. As Christ declared
when He said, "For as in the days of Noah, and as in the days of Lot, so shall it
be at the end of this world." [Matthew 24:37, not verbally quoted] This also Paul
declared when he said, "For when they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden
destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child." [1
Thessalonians 5:3] What means, "as travail upon a woman with child"? Often
have pregnant women when sporting, or at their meals, or in the bath or marketplace, and foreseeing nothing of what was coming, been seized in a moment by
their pains. Now since our case is like theirs, let us ever be prepared, for we shall
not always hear these things, we shall not always have power to do them. "In the
grave" says David, "who shall give You thanks?" [Psalm 6:5] Let us then repent
here, that so we may find God merciful unto us in the day that is to come, and be
enabled to enjoy abundant forgiveness; which may we all obtain, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
dominion now and ever, and world without end. Amen.