Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge." [1 Corinthians 9:18]
And when he was in that city, he abode with Aquila and Priscilla, "and wrought,
for by their occupation they were tentmakers." [Acts 18:3]
These passages show a yet more decided opposition as to the letter; we
must therefore now bring forward the solution. What then must be our reply?
That to "take no thought," does not mean "not to work," but "not to be nailed to
the things of this life"; that is, to take no care for tomorrow's ease, but to deem
that superfluous. For a man may do no work, and (yet) lay up treasure for the
morrow; and a man may work, yet be careful for nothing; for carefulness and
work are not the same thing; it is not as trusting to his work that a man works,
but, "that he may impart to him that needs." And that too which was said to
Martha refers not to works and working, but to this, that it is our duty to know
the right season, and not to spend on carnal things the time proper for listening.
Thus Christ spoke not the words as urging her to "idleness," but to rivet her to
listening. "I came," says He, "to teach you needful things, but you are anxious
about a meal. Do you desire to receive Me, and to provide for Me a costly table?
Provide another sort of entertainment, by giving me a ready hearing, and by
imitating your sister's longing for instruction." He said not this to forbid her
hospitality, (away with the thought! How could that be?) but to show that she
ought not in the season for listening be busy about other matters. For to say,
"Labor not for the meat that perishes," is not the expression of one implying that
we ought to be idle; (in fact, this most especially is "meat that perishes," for
idleness is wont to teach all wickedness;) but that we ought to work, and to
impart. This is meat that never perishes; but if any be idle and gluttonous, and
cares for luxury, that man works for "the meat that perishes." So too, if a man by
his labor should feed Christ, and give Him drink, and clothe Him, who so
senseless and mad as to say that such an one labors for the meat that perishes,
when there is for this the promise of the kingdom that is to come, and of those
good things? This meat endures forever. But at that time, since the multitudes
made no account of filth, nor sought to learn who it was that did these things,

and by what power, but desired one thing only, to fill their bellies without
working; Christ with good reason called such food, "meat that perishes." "I fed,"
He says, "your bodies, that after this ye might seek that other food which
endures, which nourishes the soul; but you again run after that which is earthy.
Therefore ye do not understand that I lead you not to this imperfect food, but to
that which gives not temporal but eternal life, which nourishes not the body but
the soul." Then when He had uttered such great words concerning Himself, and
had said that He would give this food, in order that what was spoken might not
stand in their way, to make His saying credible He attributes the supply to the
Father. For after saying, "Which the Son of Man shall give you"; He adds, "Him
has God the Father sealed," that is, "has sent Him for this purpose, that He
might bring the food to you." The saying also admits of another interpretation;
for in another place Christ says, "He that hears My words, has set to his seal that
God is true" [John 3:33], that is, has "showed forth undeniably." Which indeed
the expression seems to me to hint at even in this place, for "the Father has
sealed," is nothing else than "has declared," "has revealed by His testimony." He
in fact declared Himself too, but since He was speaking to Jews, He brought
forward the testimony of the Father.
2. Learn we then, beloved, to ask of God the things which it is meet for us
to ask of Him. For those other things, those, I mean, which belong to this life,
whichever way they may fall out, can do us no injury; for if we be rich, it is here
only that we shall enjoy our luxury; and if we fall into poverty, we shall suffer
nothing terrible. For neither the splendors nor the pains of the present life have
much power in respect either of despondency or pleasure, they are contemptible,
and slip away very swiftly. Wherefore they are called "a way," with reason,
because they pass away, and by their very nature do not long endure, but the
things which are to come endure eternally, both those of punishment and those of
the Kingdom. Let us then in regard of these things use much diligence to avoid
the first and to choose the last. For what is the advantage of this world's luxury?
Today it is, and tomorrow it is not; today a bright flower, tomorrow scattered