because he was [Acts 18:24-29] "mighty in the Scriptures," and "confuted the
Jews." And besides the point in question was that the leaders and first
disseminators of the word were not eloquent; since these were the very persons
to require some great power, for the expulsion of error in the first instance; and
then, namely at the very outset, was the abundant strength needed. Now He who
could do without educated persons at first, if afterwards some being eloquent
were admitted by Him, He did so not because He wanted them, but because He
would make no distinctions. For as He needed not wise men to effect whatever
He would, so neither, if any were afterwards found such, did He reject them on
that account.
8. But prove to me that Peter and Paul were eloquent. You can not: for they
were "unlearned and ignorant men!" As therefore Christ, when He was sending
out His disciples into the world, having shown unto them His power in Palestine
first, and said, [Luke 22:35(ὑποδήμάτος], rec. text [ὑποδηματων].) "When I sent
you forth without purse and wallet and shoe, lacked ye any thing?" permitted
them from that time forward to possess both a wallet and a purse; so also He has
done here: for the point was the manifestation of Christ's power, not the rejection
of persons from the Faith on account of their Gentile wisdom, if they were
drawing near. When the Greeks then charge the disciples with being uneducated,
let us be even more forward in the charge than they. Nor let anyone say, "Paul
was wise;" but while we exalt those among them who were great in wisdom and
admired for their excellency of speech, let us allow that all on our side were
uneducated; for it will be no slight overthrow which they will sustain from us in
that respect also: and so the victory will be brilliant indeed.
I have said these things, because I once heard a Christian disputing in a
ridiculous manner with a Greek, and both parties in their mutual fray ruining
themselves. For what things the Christian ought to have said, these the Greek
asserted; and what things it was natural to expect the Greek would say, these the
Christian pleaded for himself. As thus: the dispute being about Paul and Plato,
the Greek endeavored to show that Paul was unlearned and ignorant; but the

Christian, from simplicity, was anxious to prove that Paul was more eloquent
than Plato. And so the victory was on the side of the Greek, this argument being
allowed to prevail. For if Paul was a more considerable person than Plato, many
probably would object that it was not by grace, but by excellency of speech that
he prevailed; so that the Christian's assertion made for the Greek. And what the
Greek said made for the Christian's; for if Paul was uneducated and yet
overcame Plato, the victory, as I was saying, was brilliant; the disciples of the
latter, in a body, having been attracted by the former, unlearned as he was, and
convinced, and brought over to his side. From whence it is plain that the Gospel
was a result not of human wisdom, but of the grace of God.
Wherefore, lest we fall into the same error, and be laughed to scorn, arguing
thus with Greeks whenever we have a controversy with them; let us charge the
Apostles with want of learning; for this same charge is praise. And when they
say that the Apostles were rude, let us follow up the remark and say that they
were also untaught, and unlettered, and poor, and vile, and stupid, and obscure. It
is not a slander on the Apostles to say so, but it is even a glory that, being such,
they should have outshone the whole world. For these untrained, and rude, and
illiterate men, as completely vanquished the wise, and powerful, and the tyrants,
and those who flourished in wealth and glory and all outward good things, as
though they had not been men at all: from whence it is manifest that great is the
power of the Cross; and that these things were done by no human strength. For
the results do not keep the course of nature, rather what was done was above all
nature. Now when any thing takes place above nature, and exceedingly above it,
on the side of rectitude and utility; it is quite plain that these things are done by
some Divine power and cooperation. And observe; the fisherman, the tentmaker,
the publican, the ignorant, the unlettered, coming from the far distant country of
Palestine, and having beaten off their own ground the philosophers, the masters
of oratory, the skillful debaters, alone prevailed against them in a short space of
time; in the midst of many perils; the opposition of peoples and kings, the
striving of nature herself, length of time, the vehement resistance of inveterate