rich men's wives. Yet some of them often lie down to their rest in hunger, and
others continue constantly frozen by the cold; nevertheless, they pass their time
in thanksgiving and giving glory. Though you give but a penny, they give thanks
and implore ten thousand blessings on the giver; and if you give nothing they do
not complain, but even so they bless, and think themselves happy to enjoy their
daily food.
"Yes," it is replied, "since whether they will or no, they must bear it." Why,
tell me? Wherefore have you uttered this bitter expression? Are there not
shameful arts which bring gain to the aged, both men and women? Had they not
power to support themselves by those means in great abundance, provided they
had chosen to cast off all care of upright living? Do you see not how many
persons of that age, by becoming pimps and panders and by other such
ministrations, both live, and live in luxury ? Not so these, but they choose rather
to perish of hunger than to dishonor their own life and betray their salvation; and
they sit throughout the whole day, preparing a medicine of salvation for you.
For no physician stretching out the hand to apply the knife, works so
effectually to cut out the corruption from our wounds, as does a poor man
stretching out his right hand and receiving alms, to take away the scars which the
wounds have left. And what is truly wonderful, they perform this excellent
chirurgery without pain and anguish: and we who are set over the people and
give you so much wholesome advice, do not more truly discourse than he does,
who sits before the doors of the church, by his silence and his countenance. For
we too sound these things in your ears every day, saying, "Be not high-minded,
O man; human nature is a thing that soon declines and is ready to fall away; our
youth hastens on to old age, our beauty to deformity, our strength to weakness,
our honor to contempt, our health falls away to sickness, our glory to meanness,
our riches to poverty; our concerns are like a violent current that never will
stand still, but keeps hastening down the steep."
The same advice do they also give and more than this, by their appearance
and by their experience itself too, which is a yet plainer kind of advice. How

many, for instance, of those who now sit without, were in the bloom of youth
and did great things? How many of these loathsome looking persons surpassed
many, both in vigor of body and in beauty of countenance? Nay, disbelieve it not
nor deride. For surely, life is full of ten thousand such examples. For if from
mean and humble persons many have oftentimes become kings, what marvel is it
if from being great and glorious, some have been made humble and mean? Since
the former is much the more extraordinary: but the latter, of perpetual
occurrence. So that one ought not to be incredulous that any of them ever
flourished in arts, and arms, and abundance of wealth, but rather to pity them
with great compassion and to fear for ourselves, lest we too should sometime
suffer the same things. For we too are men and are subject to this speedy change.
8. But perchance some one of the thoughtless, and of those who are
accustomed to scoff, will object to what has been said, and will altogether deride
us, saying, "How long will you not cease continually introducing poor men and
beggars in your discourses, and prophesying to us of misfortunes, and
denouncing poverty to come, and desiring to make us beggars?" Not from a
desire to make beggars of you, O man, do I say these things, but hastening to
open unto you the riches of heaven. Since he too, who to the healthy man makes
mention of the sick and relates their anguish, says it not to make him diseased,
but to preserve him in health, by the fear of their calamities cutting off his
remissness. Poverty seems to you to be a fearful thing and to be dreaded, even to
the mere name of it. Yea, and therefore are we poor, because we are afraid of
poverty; though we have ten thousand talents. For not he who has nothing is
poor, but he who shudders at poverty. Since in men's calamities also it is not
those who suffer great evils whom we lament and account wretched, but those
who know not how to bear them, even though they be small. Whereas he that
knows how to bear them is, as all know, worthy of praises and crowns. And to
prove that this is so, whom do we applaud in the games? Those who are much
beaten and do not vex themselves, but hold their head on high; or those who fly
after the first strokes? Are not those even crowned by us as manly and noble;