And if they really are dead men, how is it that they move about, and speak, and perform those other
functions which are not the actions of the dead, but of the living? But if they are now alive, and if
their whole body partakes of life, how can they venture the assertion that the flesh is not qualified
to be a partaker of life, when they do confess that they have life at the present moment? It is just
as if anybody were to take up a sponge full of water, or a torch on fire, and to declare that the sponge
could not possibly partake of the water, or the torch of the fire. In this very manner do those men,
by alleging that they are alive and bear life about in their members, contradict themselves afterwards,
when they represent these members as not being capable of [receiving] life. But if the present
temporal life, which is of such an inferior nature to eternal life, can nevertheless effect so much as
to quicken our mortal members, why should not eternal life, being much more powerful than this,
vivify the flesh, which has already held converse with, and been accustomed to sustain, life? For
that the flesh can really partake of life, is shown from the fact of its being alive; for it lives on, as
long as it is God's purpose that it should do so. It is manifest, too, that God has the power to confer
life upon it, inasmuch as He grants life to us who are in existence. And, therefore, since the Lord
has power to infuse life into what He has fashioned, and since the flesh is capable of being quickened,
what remains to prevent its participating in incorruption, which is a blissful and never-ending life
granted by God?

### Chapter IV.—Those persons are deceived who feign another God the Father besides the
Creator of the world; for he must have been feeble and useless, or else malignant and full of
envy, if he be either unable or unwilling to extend external life to our bodies.
1. Those persons who feign the existence of another Father beyond the Creator, and who term
him the good God, do deceive themselves; for they introduce him as a feeble, worthless, and
negligent being, not to say malign and full of envy, inasmuch as they affirm that our bodies are not
quickened by him. For when they say of things which it is manifest to all do remain immortal, such
as the spirit and the soul, and such other things, that they are quickened by the Father, but that
another thing [viz. the body] which is quickened in no different manner than by God granting [life]
to it, is abandoned by life,—[they must either confess] that this proves their Father to be weak and
powerless, or else envious and malignant. For since the Creator does even here quicken our mortal
bodies, and promises them resurrection by the prophets, as I have pointed out; who [in that case]
is shown to be more powerful, stronger, or truly good? Whether is it the Creator who vivifies the
whole man, or is it their Father, falsely so called? He feigns to be the quickener of those things
which are immortal by nature, to which things life is always present by their very nature; but he
does not benevolently quicken those things which required his assistance, that they might live, but
leaves them carelessly to fall under the power of death. Whether is it the case, then, that their Father
does not bestow life upon them when he has the power of so doing, or is it that he does not possess
the power? If, on the one hand, it is because he cannot, he is, upon that supposition, not a powerful