perils; that had been favoured with pardon, amidst the multitude of its sins; that
alone had been able to avoid captivity, while all the rest were carried away, not
once or twice, but very often; was ruined solely by an oath. But how, I proceed
to state.
9. One of their kings was Zedekiah. This Zedekiah took an oath to
Nebuchadnezzar, king of the barbarians, that he would remain in alliance with
him. Afterwards he revolted, and went over to the king of Egypt, disdaining the
obligation of his oath, and suffered the things of which you shall hear presently.
But first, it is necessary to mention the parable of the prophet, in which he
enigmatically represented all these matters: "The word of the Lord," says he,
"came to me, saying, Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable, and
say, Thus says the Lord God: A great eagle, with great wings, and long extended,
full of claws." [Ezekiel 17:2-3] Here he calls the king of the Babylonians an
eagle, and speaks of him as being "great, and long-winged;" and he calls him
long-extended and "full of claws," on account of the multitude of his army, and
the greatness of his power, and the swiftness of his invasion. For just as the
wings and claws of the eagle are his armour, so are horses and soldiers to kings.
This eagle, he goes on to say, "has the leading to enter into Lebanon." What is
meant by the "leading?" Counsel— design. And Judæa is called Lebanon,
because of its situation near that mountain. Afterwards, intending to speak of the
oaths and treaties, "He took," says he, "of the seed of the land, and planted it in a
fruitful field, that it might take root by great waters. He placed it to be looked
upon; and it grew, and became a weak vine, and of small stature, and it stretched
out its branches towards him, and its roots were under him." [Ezekiel 17:5-6]
Here he calls the city of Jerusalem a vine; but in saying that it stretched out its
branches towards the eagle, and that its roots were under him, he refers to the
treaties and alliances made with him; and that it cast itself upon him. Next,
purposing to declare the iniquity of this, he says, "And there was another great
eagle," (speaking of the Egyptian king), "with great wings, and having many
claws; and the vine did bend itself toward him, and its tendril toward him, and

shot out its branches, that it might be watered. Therefore, I said, Thus says the
Lord God: Shall it prosper?" [Ezekiel 7:7-8] That is to say, "after having broken
the oath, and the treaties, shall it be able to remain, or to be safe, or to avoid
falling?" Presently, for the purpose of showing that this is not to happen, but that
it is certainly to be destroyed on account of the oath, he discourses concerning its
punishment, and alleges the cause. "For its tender roots and its fruits shall
become corrupt, and all which springs therefrom shall be withered."
[Ezekiel 17:9] And for the purpose of showing that it will not be destroyed by
human strength, but because it has made God its enemy by means of these oaths,
he subjoins, "Not by a mighty arm, nor by much people, to pluck it up by its
roots." Such indeed is the parable, but the prophet again explains it, when he
says, "Behold, the king of Babylon comes against Jerusalem." [Ezekiel 17:12]
And then, after saying some other things between, he mentions the oaths and the
treaties. "For" says he, "he shall make a covenant with him;" [Ezekiel 17:14]
and presently, speaking of the departure from it, he goes on to say, "And he will
depart from him, by sending messengers into Egypt, that they might give him
horses and much people." And then he proceeds to show that it is on account of
the oath that all this destruction is to take place. "Surely in the place where the
king dwells that made him king, he who has despised My curse, and has
transgressed My covenant, in the midst of Babylon he shall die; and not by great
power nor by multitude, because he despised the oath in transgressing this My
covenant; I will surely recompense upon his own head this My oath which he has
dishonoured, and My covenant which he has broken; and I will spread My net
upon him." [Ezekiel 17:16-20] Do you see, that not once, or twice, but
repeatedly, it is said that because of the oath he was to suffer all these things. For
God is inexorable when oaths are treated contemptuously. Nor merely from the
punishment which was brought upon the city by the oath, but also from the
delay, and the postponement, may it be seen how much God is concerned for the
inviolability of oaths. "For it came to pass," we are told, "in the ninth year of the
reign of Zedekiah, on the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar the king