Paul, "with a godly jealousy, for I espoused you to one husband that I might
present you as a pure virgin to Christ." [2 Corinthians 11:2] What wisdom and
understanding! "I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy." What means this?
"I am jealous," he says: are you jealous seeing you are a spiritual man? I am
jealous he says as God is. And has God jealousy? Yea the jealousy not of
passion, but of love, and earnest zeal. I am jealous over you with the jealousy of
God. Shall I tell you how He manifests His jealousy? He saw the world
corrupted by devils, and He delivered His own Son to save it. For words spoken
in reference to God have not the same force as when spoken in reference to
ourselves: for instance we say God is jealous, God is angry, God repents, God
hates. These words are human, but they have a meaning which becomes the
nature of God. How is God jealous? "I am jealous over you with the jealousy of
God." [2 Corinthians 11:2] Is God angry? "O Lord reproach me not in your
indignation." Does God slumber? "Awake, wherefore do you sleep, O Lord?"
Does God repent? "I repent that I have made man." [Genesis 6:7] Does God
hate? "My soul hates your feasts and your new moons." [Isaiah 1:14] Well do not
consider the poverty of the expressions: but grasp their divine meaning. God is
jealous, for He loves, God is angry, not as yielding to passion, but for the
purpose of chastising, and punishing. God sleeps, not as really slumbering, but
as being long-suffering. Choose out the expression. Thus when you hear that
God begets the Son, think not of division but of the unity of substance. For God
has taken many of these words from us as we also have borrowed others from
Him, that we may receive honour thereby.
8. Do you understand what I have said? Attend carefully my beloved. There
are divine names, and there are human names. God has received from me, and
He Himself has given to me. Give me yours, and take mine He says. You have
need of mine: I have no need of yours, but you have of mine inasmuch as my
nature is unmixed, but you are a human being encompassed with a body, seeking
also corporeal terms in order that, by borrowing expressions which are familiar
to you, thou who art thus encompassed with a body, may be able to think on

thoughts which transcend your understanding. What kind of names has He
received from me, and what kind has He given to me? He Himself is God, and
He has called me God; with Him is the essential nature as an actual fact, with me
only the honour of the name: "I have said you are gods, and you are all children
of the most highest." Here are words, but in the other case there is the actual
reality. He has called me god, for by that name I have received honour. He
Himself was called man, he was called Son of man, he was called the Way, the
Door, the Rock. These words He borrowed from me; the others He gave from
Himself to me. Wherefore was He called the Way? That you might understand
that by Him we have access to the Father. Wherefore was He called the Rock?
That you might understand the secure and unshaken character of the faith.
Wherefore was He called the Foundation? That you might understand that He
upholds all things. Wherefore was He called the Root? That you might
understand that in Him we have our power of growth. Wherefore was He called
the Shepherd? Because He feeds us. Wherefore was He called a sheep? Because
He was sacrificed for us and became a propitiatory offering. Wherefore was He
called the Life? Because He raised us up when we were dead. Wherefore was He
called the Light? Because He delivered us from darkness. Why was He called an
Arm? Because He is of one substance with the Father. Why was He called the
Word? Because He was begotten of the Father. For as my word is the offspring
of my spirit, even so was the Son begotten of the Father. Wherefore is He called
our raiment? Because I was clothed with Him when I was baptized. Why is He
called a table? Because I feed upon Him when I partake of the mysteries. Why is
He called a house? Because I dwell in Him. Why is He called an inmate of the
house? Because we become His Temple. Wherefore is He called the Head?
Because I have been made a member of His. Why is He called a Bridegroom?
Because He has taken me as His bride. Wherefore is He called undefiled?
Because He took me as a virgin. Wherefore is He called Master? Because I am
His bondmaid.
9. For observe the Church, how, as I was saying, she is sometimes a bride,