Mine are One; of what I should have taught, of those things shall He also speak.
Do not suppose His words are other than Mine, for those words are Mine, and
confirm My opinion. For One is the will of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost." Thus also He wills us to be, when He says, "That they may be one,
as You and I are One." [John 17:11]
4. There is nothing equal to unanimity and concord; for so one is manifold.
If two or ten are of one mind, the one is one no longer, but each one is multiplied
tenfold, and you will find the one in the ten, and the ten in the one; and if they
have an enemy, he who attacks the one, as having attacked the ten, is
vanquished; for he is the mark not for one, but for ten opponents. Is one in want?
No, he is not in want, for he is wealthy in his greater part, that is, in the nine; and
the needy part, the lesser, is concealed by the wealthy part, the greater. Each of
these has twenty hands, twenty eyes, and as many feet. For he sees not with his
own eyes alone, but with those of others; he walks not with his own feet alone,
but with those of others; he works not with his own hands alone, but with theirs.
He has ten souls, for not only does he take thought for himself, but those souls
also for him. And if they be made a hundred, it will still be the same, and their
power will be extended. Do you see the excess of love, how it makes the one
both irresistible and manifold, how one can even be in many places, the same
both in Persia and in Rome, and that what nature cannot do, love can? For one
part of him will be here, and one there, or rather he will be wholly here and
wholly there. If then he have a thousand or two thousand friends, consider again
whither his power will extend. Do you see what an increase-giving thing is love?
For the wonderful thing is this, its making one a thousand. Why then do we not
acquire this power and place ourselves in safety? This is better than all power or
riches, this is more than health, than light itself, it is the groundwork of good
courage. How long do we set our love on one or two? Consider also the action in
the contrary way. Suppose a man without a friend, a mark of the utmost folly,
(for a fool will say, "I have no friend,") what sort of life will such a one lead?
For though he be infinitely rich, in plenty and luxury, possessed of ten thousand

good things, yet is he desolate and bare of all. But in the case of friends not so;
though they be poor men, yet are they better provided than the wealthy; and the
things which a man undertakes not to say for himself, a friend will say for him,
and whatever gratifications he is not able to procure for himself, he will be
enabled to obtain by means of another, and much more; and it will be to us the
groundwork of all enjoyment and safety, since one who is guarded by so many
spearmen cannot suffer harm. For the king's body guards are not equal in their
strictness to these. The one perform their watch through compulsion and fear, the
others through kindness and love; and love is far mightier than fear. The king
fears his own guards; the friend is more confident in them than in himself, and
by reason of them fears none of those that plot against him. Let us then engage
in this traffic; the poor man, that he may have consolation in his poverty; the
rich, that he may possess his wealth in safety; the ruler, that he may rule with
safety; the ruled, that he may have benevolent rulers. This is the source of
kindness, this the groundwork of gentleness; since even among beasts, those are
the most fierce and untamable which are not gregarious. For this cause we dwell
in cities, and have public places, that we may converse with one another. This
also Paul commanded, saying, "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves
together" [Hebrews 10:25]; for no evil is so great as solitariness, and the state
which is without compact and intercourse. "What then," says some one, "of the
solitaries, and of those who have occupied the summits of the mountains?" That
neither are they without friends; they have indeed fled from the turmoil of
common life, but they have many of one soul with them, and closely bound
together one to another; and they have retired that they might rightly accomplish
this thing. For since the rivalry of business causes many disputes, therefore,
removing from among men, they cultivate love with much exactness. "But how,"
says some one, "if a man be alone can he have ten thousand friends?" I, for my
part, desire, if it be possible, that men should know how to dwell one with
another; but for the present let the properties of friendship remain unshaken. For
it is not place which makes friends. They, for instance, have many who admire