intelligible objects.
Consequently, by such knowledge as the angels have of things
through the Word, they know all things under one intelligible
species, which is the Divine essence. Therefore, as regards such
knowledge, they know all things at once: just as in heaven "our
thoughts will not be fleeting, going and returning from one thing to
another, but we shall survey all our knowledge at the same time by
one glance," as Augustine says (De Trin. xv, 16). But by that
knowledge wherewith the angels know things by innate species, they
can at one time know all things which can be comprised under one
species; but not such as are under various species.
Reply to Objection 1: To understand many things as one, is, so to
speak, to understand one thing.
Reply to Objection 2: The intellect is informed by the intelligible
species which it has within it. So it can behold at the same time
many intelligible objects under one species; as one body can by one
shape be likened to many bodies.
To the third objection the answer is the same as the first.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether an angel's knowledge is discursive?

Objection 1: It would seem that the knowledge of an angel is
discursive. For the discursive movement of the mind comes from
one thing being known through another. But the angels know one
thing through another; for they know creatures through the Word.
Therefore the intellect of an angel knows by discursive method.
Objection 2: Further, whatever a lower power can do, the higher can
do. But the human intellect can syllogize, and know causes in
effects; all of which is the discursive method. Therefore the intellect
of the angel, which is higher in the order of nature, can with greater
reason do this.
Objection 3: Further, Isidore (De sum. bono i, 10) says that "demons
learn more things by experience." But experimental knowledge is
discursive: for, "one experience comes of many remembrances, and
one universal from many experiences," as Aristotle observes
(Poster. ii; Metaph. vii). Therefore an angel's knowledge is
discursive.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. vii) that the "angels do
not acquire Divine knowledge from separate discourses, nor are they
led to something particular from something common."
I answer that, As has often been stated (Article 1; Question 55,
Article 1), the angels hold that grade among spiritual substances
which the heavenly bodies hold among corporeal substances: for
Dionysius calls them "heavenly minds" (Article 1; Question 55,
Article 1). Now, the difference between heavenly and earthly bodies
is this, that earthly bodies obtain their last perfection by chance and
movement: while the heavenly bodies have their last perfection at
once from their very nature. So, likewise, the lower, namely, the
human, intellects obtain their perfection in the knowledge of truth by
a kind of movement and discursive intellectual operation; that is to
say, as they advance from one known thing to another. But, if from
the knowledge of a known principle they were straightway to
perceive as known all its consequent conclusions, then there would
be no discursive process at all. Such is the condition of the angels,
because in the truths which they know naturally, they at once behold
all things whatsoever that can be known in them.