SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.4.

other hand there are acts that are not deserving of praise save
through being done out of reverence for God: such acts are properly
called sacrifices, and belong to the virtue of religion.
Reply to Objection 1: The very fact that we wish to cling to God in a
spiritual fellowship pertains to reverence for God: and consequently
the act of any virtue assumes the character of a sacrifice through
being done in order that we may cling to God in holy fellowship.
Reply to Objection 2: Man's good is threefold. There is first his soul's
good which is offered to God in a certain inward sacrifice by
devotion, prayer and other like interior acts: and this is the principal
sacrifice. The second is his body's good, which is, so to speak,
offered to God in martyrdom, and abstinence or continency. The
third is the good which consists of external things: and of these we
offer a sacrifice to God, directly when we offer our possession to
God immediately, and indirectly when we share them with our
neighbor for God's sake.
Reply to Objection 3: A "sacrifice," properly speaking, requires that
something be done to the thing which is offered to God, for instance
animals were slain and burnt, the bread is broken, eaten, blessed.
The very word signifies this, since "sacrifice" is so called because a
man does something sacred [facit sacrum]. On the other hand an
"oblation" is properly the offering of something to God even if
nothing be done thereto, thus we speak of offering money or bread
at the altar, and yet nothing is done to them. Hence every sacrifice is
an oblation, but not conversely. "First-fruits" are oblations, because
they were offered to God, according to Dt. 26, but they are not a
sacrifice, because nothing sacred was done to them. "Tithes,"
however, are neither a sacrifice nor an oblation, properly speaking,
because they are not offered immediately to God, but to the
ministers of Divine worship.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether all are bound to offer sacrifices?

Objection 1: It would seem that all are not bound to offer sacrifices.
The Apostle says (Rm. 3:19): "What things soever the Law speaketh,
it speaketh to them that are in the Law." Now the law of sacrifices
was not given to all, but only to the Hebrew people. Therefore all are
not bound to offer sacrifices.
Objection 2: Further, sacrifices are offered to God in order to signify
something. But not everyone is capable of understanding these
significations. Therefore not all are bound to offer sacrifices.
Objection 3: Further, priests [sacerdotes] are so called because they
offer sacrifice to God. But all are not priests. Therefore not all are
bound to offer sacrifices.
On the contrary, The offering of sacrifices of is of the natural law, as
stated above (Article 1). Now all are bound to do that which is of the
natural law. Therefore all are bound to offer sacrifice to God.
I answer that, Sacrifice is twofold, as stated above (Article 2). The
first and principal is the inward sacrifice, which all are bound to
offer, since all are obliged to offer to God a devout mind. The other is
the outward sacrifice, and this again is twofold. There is a sacrifice
which is deserving of praise merely through being offered to God in
protestation of our subjection to God: and the obligation of offering
this sacrifice was not the same for those under the New or the Old
Law, as for those who were not under the Law. For those who are
under the Law are bound to offer certain definite sacrifices
according to the precepts of the Law, whereas those who were not
under the Law were bound to perform certain outward actions in
God's honor, as became those among whom they dwelt, but not
definitely to this or that action. The other outward sacrifice is when
the outward actions of the other virtues are performed out of
reverence for God; some of which are a matter of precept; and to
these all are bound, while others are works of supererogation, and to
these all are not bound.
Reply to Objection 1: All were not bound to offer those particular
sacrifices which were prescribed in the Law: but they were bound to
some sacrifices inward or outward, as stated above.