worst of all, is that this sin seems to be an unimportant one, while in fact it is
more grievous than any other; for though you show mercy and watchest and
fastest, you are more accursed than any if you envy your brother. As is clear
from this circumstance also. A man of the Corinthians was once guilty of
adultery, yet he was charged with his sin and soon restored to righteousness;
Cain envied Abel; but he was not healed, and although God Himself continually
charmed the wound, he became more pained and wave-tossed, and was hurried
on to murder. Thus this passion is worse than that other, and does not easily
permit itself to be cured except we give heed. Let us then by all means tear it up
by the roots, considering this, that as we offend God when we waste with envy at
other men's blessings, so when we rejoice with them we are well pleasing to
Him, and render ourselves partakers of the good things laid up for the righteous.
Therefore Paul exhorts us to "Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with
them that weep" [Romans 12:15], that on either hand we may reap great profit.
Considering then that even when we labor not, by rejoicing with him that
labors, we become sharers of his crown, let us cast aside all envy, and implant
charity in our souls, that by applauding those of our brethren who are well
pleasing unto God, we may obtain both present and future good things, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with
whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.

Homily 38 on the Gospel of John
John 5:14
"Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto him, Behold, you are
made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you."
1. A fearful thing is sin, fearful, and the ruin of the soul, and the mischief
oftentimes through its excess has overflowed and attacked men's bodies also. For
since for the most part when the soul is diseased we feel no pain, but if the body
receive though but a little hurt, we use every exertion to free it from its infirmity,
because we are sensible of the infirmity, therefore God oftentimes punishes the
body for the transgressions of the soul, so that by means of the scourging of the
inferior part, the better part also may receive some healing. Thus too among the
Corinthians Paul restored the adulterer, checking the disease of the soul by the
destruction of the flesh, and having applied the knife to the body, so repressed
the evil [1 Corinthians 5:5]; like some excellent physician employing external
cautery for dropsy or spleen, when they refuse to yield to internal remedies. This
also Christ did in the case of the paralytic; as He showed when He said, "Behold,
you are made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you."
Now what do we learn from this? First, that his disease had been produced
by his sins; secondly, that the accounts of hell fire are to be believed; thirdly, that
the punishment is long, nay endless. Where now are those who say, "I murdered
in an hour, I committed adultery in a little moment of time, and am I eternally
punished?" For behold this man had not sinned for so many years as he suffered,
for he had spent a whole lifetime in the length of his punishment; and sins are
not judged by time, but by the nature of the transgressions. Besides this, we may
see another thing, that though we have suffered severely for former sins, if we
afterwards fall into the same, we shall suffer much more severely. And with