have any; for in the latter case marriage has been to no purpose, in the former a
bitter bondage has to be undergone. If a child is sick, it is the occasion of no
small fear; if he dies an untimely death, there is inconsolable grief; and at every
stage of growth there are various anxieties on their account, and many fears and
toils. And what is one to say to the rascalities of domestic slaves? Is this then
life, Theodore, when one's soul is distracted in so many directions, when a man
has to serve so many, to live for so many, and never for himself? Now among us,
O friend, none of these things happen, I appeal to yourself as a witness. For
during that short time when you were willing to lift your head above the waves
of this world, you know what great cheerfulness and gladness you enjoyed. For
there is no man free, save only he who lives for Christ. He stands superior to all
troubles, and if he does not choose to injure himself no one else will be able to
do this, but he is impregnable; he is not stung by the loss of wealth; for he has
learned that we "brought nothing into this world, neither can we carry anything
out;" [1 Timothy 6:7] he is not caught by the longings of ambition or glory; for
he has learned that our citizenship is in heaven; [Philippians 3:20] no one annoys
him by abuse, or provokes him by blows; there is only one calamity for a
Christian which is, disobedience to God; but all the other things, such as loss of
property, exile, peril of life, he does not even reckon to be a grievance at all. And
that which all dread, departure hence to the other world—this is to him sweeter
than life itself. For as when one has climbed to the top of a cliff and gazes on the
sea and those who are sailing upon it, he sees some being washed by the waves,
others running upon hidden rocks, some hurrying in one direction, others being
driven in another, like prisoners, by the force of the gale, many actually in the
water, some of them using their hands only in the place of a boat and a rudder,
and many drifting along upon a single plank, or some fragment of the vessel,
others floating dead, a scene of manifold and various disaster; even so he who is
engaged in the service of Christ drawing himself out of the turmoil and stormy
billows of life takes his seat upon secure and lofty ground. For what position can
be loftier or more secure than that in which a man has only one anxiety, "How he

ought to please God?" [1 Thessalonians 4:1] Have you seen the shipwrecks,
Theodore, of those who sail upon this sea? Wherefore, I beseech you, avoid the
deep water, avoid the stormy billows, and seize some lofty spot where it is not
possible to be captured. There is a resurrection, there is a judgment, there is a
terrible tribunal which awaits us when we have gone out of this world; "we must
all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ." [Romans 14:10] It is not in vain
that we are threatened with hell fire, it is not without purpose that such great
blessings have been prepared for us. The things of this life are a shadow, and
more naught even than a shadow, being full of many fears, and many dangers,
and extreme bondage. Do not then deprive yourself both of that world, and of
this, when you may gain both, if you please. Now that they who live in Christ
will gain the things of this world Paul teaches us when he says: "But I spare
you;" [1 Corinthians 7:28] and again "But this I say for your profit."
[1 Corinthians 7:35] Do you see that even here he who cares for the things of the
Lord is superior to the man who has married? It is not possible for one who has
departed to the other world to repent; no athlete, when he has quitted the lists,
and the spectators have dispersed, can contend again.
Be always thinking of these things, and break in pieces the sharp sword of
the Evil One, by means of which he destroys many. And this is despair, which
cuts off from hope those who have been overthrown. This is the strong weapon
of the enemy, and the only way in which he holds down those who have been
made captives is by binding them with this chain, which, if we choose, we shall
speedily be able to break by the grace of God. I know that I have exceeded the
due measure of a letter, but forgive me; for I am not willingly in this condition,
but have been constrained by my love and sorrow, owing to which I forced
myself to write this letter also, although many would have prevented me. "Cease
labouring in vain and sowing upon rock" many have been saying to me. But I
hearkened to none of them. For there is hope I said to myself that, God willing,
my letter will accomplish something; but if that which we deprecate should take
place, we shall at least have the advantage of escaping self reproach for keeping