"equality" to the Son, "concord" or "union" to the Holy Ghost. It is
manifest that these three imply unity, but in different ways. For
"unity" is said absolutely, as it does not presuppose anything else;
and for this reason it is appropriated to the Father, to Whom any
other person is not presupposed since He is the "principle without
principle." "Equality" implies unity as regards another; for that is
equal which has the same quantity as another. So equality is
appropriated to the Son, Who is the "principle from a principle."
"Union" implies the unity of two; and is therefore appropriated to the
Holy Ghost, inasmuch as He proceeds from two. And from this we
can understand what Augustine means when he says (De Doctr.
Christ. i, 5) that "The Three are one, by reason of the Father; They
are equal by reason of the Son; and are united by reason of the Holy
Ghost." For it is clear that we trace a thing back to that in which we
find it first: just as in this lower world we attribute life to the
vegetative soul, because therein we find the first trace of life. Now
"unity" is perceived at once in the person of the Father, even if by an
impossible hypothesis, the other persons were removed. So the
other persons derive their unity from the Father. But if the other
persons be removed, we do not find equality in the Father, but we
find it as soon as we suppose the Son. So, all are equal by reason of
the Son, not as if the Son were the principle of equality in the Father,
but that, without the Son equal to the Father, the Father could not be
called equal; because His equality is considered firstly in regard to
the Son: for that the Holy Ghost is equal to the Father, is also from
the Son. Likewise, if the Holy Ghost, Who is the union of the two, be
excluded, we cannot understand the oneness of the union between
the Father and the Son. So all are connected by reason of the Holy
Ghost; because given the Holy Ghost, we find whence the Father and
the Son are said to be united.
According to the third consideration, which brings before us the
adequate power of God in the sphere of causality, there is said to be
a third kind of appropriation, of "power," "wisdom," and "goodness."
This kind of appropriation is made both by reason of similitude as
regards what exists in the divine persons, and by reason of
dissimilitude if we consider what is in creatures. For "power" has the
nature of a principle, and so it has a likeness to the heavenly Father,
Who is the principle of the whole Godhead. But in an earthly father it
is wanting sometimes by reason of old age. "Wisdom" has likeness
to the heavenly Son, as the Word, for a word is nothing but the
concept of wisdom. In an earthly son this is sometimes absent by
reason of lack of years. "Goodness," as the nature and object of

love, has likeness to the Holy Ghost; but seems repugnant to the
earthly spirit, which often implies a certain violent impulse,
according to Is. 25:4: "The spirit of the strong is as a blast beating on
the wall." "Strength" is appropriated to the Son and to the Holy
Ghost, not as denoting the power itself of a thing, but as sometimes
used to express that which proceeds from power; for instance, we
say that the strong work done by an agent is its strength.
According to the fourth consideration, i.e. God's relation to His
effects, there arise appropriation of the expression "from Whom, by
Whom, and in Whom." For this preposition "from" [ex] sometimes
implies a certain relation of the material cause; which has no place in
God; and sometimes it expresses the relation of the efficient cause,
which can be applied to God by reason of His active power; hence it
is appropriated to the Father in the same way as power. The
preposition "by" [per] sometimes designates an intermediate cause;
thus we may say that a smith works "by" a hammer. Hence the word
"by" is not always appropriated to the Son, but belongs to the Son
properly and strictly, according to the text, "All things were made by
Him" (Jn. 1:3); not that the Son is an instrument, but as "the principle
from a principle." Sometimes it designates the habitude of a form
"by" which an agent works; thus we say that an artificer works by his
art. Hence, as wisdom and art are appropriated to the Son, so also is
the expression "by Whom." The preposition "in" strictly denotes the
habitude of one containing. Now, God contains things in two ways:
in one way by their similitudes; thus things are said to be in God, as
existing in His knowledge. In this sense the expression "in Him"
should be appropriated to the Son. In another sense things are
contained in God forasmuch as He in His goodness preserves and
governs them, by guiding them to a fitting end; and in this sense the
expression "in Him" is appropriated to the Holy Ghost, as likewise is
"goodness." Nor need the habitude of the final cause (though the
first of causes) be appropriated to the Father, Who is "the principle
without a principle": because the divine persons, of Whom the
Father is the principle, do not proceed from Him as towards an end,
since each of Them is the last end; but They proceed by a natural
procession, which seems more to belong to the nature of a natural
power.
Regarding the other points of inquiry, we can say that since "truth"
belongs to the intellect, as stated above (Question 16, Article 1), it is
appropriated to the Son, without, however, being a property of His.
For truth can be considered as existing in the thought or in the thing