FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

If, however, we speak of bodily uncleanness, consisting in some
kind of corruption, the flesh of certain animals is unclean, either
because like the pig they feed on unclean things; or because their
life is among unclean surroundings: thus certain animals, like moles
and mice and such like, live underground, whence they contract a
certain unpleasant smell; or because their flesh, through being too
moist or too dry, engenders corrupt humors in the human body.
Hence they were forbidden to eat the flesh of flat-footed animals, i.e.
animals having an uncloven hoof, on account of their earthiness;
and in like manner they were forbidden to eat the flesh of animals
that have many clefts in their feet, because such are very fierce and
their flesh is very dry, such as the flesh of lions and the like. For the
same reason they were forbidden to eat certain birds of prey the
flesh of which is very dry, and certain water-fowl on account of their
exceeding humidity. In like manner certain fish lacking fins and
scales were prohibited on account of their excessive moisture; such
as eels and the like. They were, however, allowed to eat ruminants
and animals with a divided hoof, because in such animals the
humors are well absorbed, and their nature well balanced: for neither
are they too moist, as is indicated by the hoof; nor are they too
earthly, which is shown by their having not a flat but a cloven hoof.
Of fishes they were allowed to partake of the drier kinds, of which
the fins and scales are an indication, because thereby the moist
nature of the fish is tempered. Of birds they were allowed to eat the
tamer kinds, such as hens, partridges, and the like. Another reason
was detestation of idolatry: because the Gentiles, and especially the
Egyptians, among whom they had grown up, offered up these
forbidden animals to their idols, or employed them for the purpose of
sorcery: whereas they did not eat those animals which the Jews
were allowed to eat, but worshipped them as gods, or abstained, for
some other motive, from eating them, as stated above (Article 3, ad
2). The third reason was to prevent excessive care about food:
wherefore they were allowed to eat those animals which could be
procured easily and promptly.
With regard to blood and fat, they were forbidden to partake of those
of any animals whatever without exception. Blood was forbidden,
both in order to avoid cruelty, that they might abhor the shedding of
human blood, as stated above (Article 3, ad 8); and in order to shun
idolatrous rite whereby it was customary for men to collect the blood
and to gather together around it for a banquet in honor of the idols,
to whom they held the blood to be most acceptable. Hence the Lord

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.