What then comes next? For this woman's sake, many lie awake, and whatever
she commands, readily obey; give up house, and father, and mother, and friends,
and money, and patronage, and leave all that belongs to them in want and
desolation; but for the sake of God, or rather for the sake of ourselves, we often
do not choose to expend even the third portion of our substance, but we look on
the hungry, we overlook him, and run past the naked, and do not even bestow a
word upon him. But the lovers, if they see but a little servant girl of their
mistress, and her a barbarian, they stand in the middle of the market-place, and
talk with her, as if they were proud and glad to do so, unrolling an interminable
round of words; and for her sake they count all their living as nothing, deem
rulers and rule nothing, (they know it, all who have had experience of the
malady,) and thank her more when she commands, than others when they serve.
Is there not with good reason a hell? Are there not with good reason ten
thousand punishments? Let us then become sober, let us apply to the service of
God as much, or half, or even the third part of what others supply to the harlot.
Perhaps again ye shudder; for so do I myself. But I would not that you should
shudder at words only, but at the actions; as it is, here indeed our hearts are made
orderly, but we go forth and cast all away. What then is the gain? For there, if it
be required to spend money, no one laments his poverty, but even borrows it to
give, perchance, when smitten. But here, if we do but mention almsgiving, they
pretend to us children, and wife, and house, and patronage, and ten thousand
excuses. "But," says some one, "the pleasure is great there." This it is that I
lament and mourn. What if I show that the pleasure here is greater? For there
shame, and insult, and expense, cut away no little of the pleasure, and after these
the quarreling and enmity; but here there is nothing of the kind. What is there,
tell me, equal to this pleasure, to sit expecting heaven and the kingdom there,
and the glory of the saints, and the life that is endless? "But these things," says
some one, "are in expectation, the others in experience." What kind of
experience? Will you that I tell you the pleasures which are here also by
experience? Consider what freedom you enjoy, and how you fear and tremblest

at no man when you live in company with virtue, neither enemy, nor plotter, nor
informer, nor rival in credit or in love, nor envious person, nor poverty, nor
sickness, nor any other human thing. But there, although ten thousand things be
according to your mind, though riches flow in as from a fountain, yet the war
with rivals, and the plots, and ambuscades, will make more miserable than any
the life of him who wallows with those women. For when that abominable one is
haughty, and insolent, you needs must kindle quarrel to flatter her. This therefore
is more grievous than ten thousand deaths, more intolerable than any
punishment. But here there is nothing of the kind. For "the fruit," it says, "of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace." [Galatians 5:22] Here is no quarreling, nor
unseasonable pecuniary expense, nor disgrace and expense too; and if you give
but a farthing, or a loaf, or a cup of cold water, He will be much beholden to you,
and He does nothing to pain or grieve you, but all so as to make you glorious,
and free you from all shame. What defense therefore shall we have, what pardon
shall we gain, if, leaving these things, we give ourselves up to the contrary, and
voluntarily cast ourselves into the furnace that burns with fire? Wherefore I
exhort those who are sick of this malady, to recover themselves, and return to
health, and not allow themselves to fall into despair. Since that son also was in a
far more grievous state than this, yet when he returned to his father's house, he
came to his former honor, and appeared more glorious than him who had ever
been well-pleasing. Let us also imitate him, and returning to our Father, even
though it be late, let us depart from that captivity, and transfer ourselves to
freedom, that we may enjoy the Kingdom of heaven, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.