172. One who accompanies others has to realize that each person’s situation before God and their
life in grace are mysteries which no one can fully know from without. The Gospel tells us to correct
others and to help them to grow on the basis of a recognition of the objective evil of their actions
(cf. Mt 18:15), but without making judgments about their responsibility and culpability (cf. Mt 7:1;
Lk 6:37). Someone good at such accompaniment does not give in to frustrations or fears. He or
she invites others to let themselves be healed, to take up their mat, embrace the cross, leave all
behind and go forth ever anew to proclaim the Gospel. Our personal experience of being
accompanied and assisted, and of openness to those who accompany us, will teach us to be
patient and compassionate with others, and to find the right way to gain their trust, their openness
and their readiness to grow.

173. Genuine spiritual accompaniment always begins and flourishes in the context of service to
the mission of evangelization. Paul’s relationship with Timothy and Titus provides an example of
this accompaniment and formation which takes place in the midst of apostolic activity. Entrusting
them with the mission of remaining in each city to “put in order what remains to be done” (Tit 1:5;
cf. 1 Tim 1:3-5), Paul also gives them rules for their personal lives and their pastoral activity. This
is clearly distinct from every kind of intrusive accompaniment or isolated self-realization.
Missionary disciples accompany missionary disciples.

Centred on the word of God

174. Not only the homily has to be nourished by the word of God. All evangelization is based on
that word, listened to, meditated upon, lived, celebrated and witnessed to. The sacred Scriptures
are the very source of evangelization. Consequently, we need to be constantly trained in hearing
the word. The Church does not evangelize unless she constantly lets herself be evangelized. It is
indispensable that the word of God “be ever more fully at the heart of every ecclesial activity”.
God’s word, listened to and celebrated, above all in the Eucharist, nourishes and inwardly
strengthens Christians, enabling them to offer an authentic witness to the Gospel in daily life. We
have long since moved beyond that old contraposition between word and sacrament. The
preaching of the word, living and effective, prepares for the reception of the sacrament, and in the
sacrament that word attains its maximum efficacy.

175. The study of the sacred Scriptures must be a door opened to every believer. It is
essential that the revealed word radically enrich our catechesis and all our efforts to pass on the
faith. Evangelization demands familiarity with God’s word, which calls for dioceses, parishes
and Catholic associations to provide for a serious, ongoing study of the Bible, while encouraging
its prayerful individual and communal reading. We do not blindly seek God, or wait for him to
speak to us first, for “God has already spoken, and there is nothing further that we need to know,
which has not been revealed to us”. Let us receive the sublime treasure of the revealed word.