the evening bringing the price, they do not suffer themselves to take it, or to
accept the money." And why do I speak of the price of market wares and
transaction of business? Even if it were possible to receive a treasure they would
rather lose the gain than trample on their law. Are the Jews then so strict, and
this when they keep the law out of due season, and cling to an observance of it
which does not profit them, but rather does them harm: and will you, who art
superior to the shadow, to whom it has been vouchsafed to see the Sun of
Righteousness, who art ranked as a citizen of the Heavenly commonwealth, will
you not display the same zeal as those who unseasonably cleave to what is
wrong, thou who hast been entrusted with the truth, but although you are
summoned here for only a short part of the day, can you not endure to spend
even this upon the hearing of the divine oracles? And what kind of indulgence,
pray, could you obtain? And what answer will you have to make which is
reasonable and just? It is utterly impossible that one who is so indifferent and
indolent should ever obtain indulgence, even if he should allege the necessities
of worldly affairs ten thousand times over as an excuse. Do you not know that if
you come and worship God and take part in the work which goes on here, the
business you have on hand is made much easier for you? Have you worldly
anxieties? Come here on that account that by the time you spend here you may
win for yourself the favour of God, and so depart with a sense of security; that
you may have Him for your ally, that you may become invincible to the dæmons
because you are assisted by the heavenly hand. If you have the benefit of prayers
uttered by the fathers, if you take part in common prayer, if you listen to the
divine oracles, if you win for yourself the aid of God, if, armed with these
weapons, you then go forth, not even the devil himself will be able henceforth to
look you in the face, much less wicked men who are eager to insult and malign
you. But if you go from your house to the market place, and are found destitute
of these weapons, you will be easily mastered by all who insult you. This is the
reason why both in public and private affairs, many things occur contrary to our
expectation, because we have not been diligent about spiritual things in the first

place, and secondarily about the secular, but have inverted the order. For this
reason also the proper sequence and right arrangement of things has been upset,
and all our affairs are full of much confusion. Can you imagine what distress and
grief I suffer when I observe, that if a public holy day and festival is at hand
there is a concourse of all the inhabitants of the city, although there is no one to
summon them; but when the holy day and festival are past, even if we should
crack our voice by continuing to call you all day long there is no one who pays
any heed? For often when turning these things over in my mind I have groaned
heavily, and said to myself: What is the use of exhortation or advice, when you
do everything merely by the force of habit, and do not become a whit more
zealous in consequence of my teaching? For whereas in the festivals you need no
exhortation from me, but, when they are past you profit nothing by my teaching,
do you not show that my discourse, so far as you are concerned, is superfluous?
4. Perhaps many of those who hear these things are grieved. But such is not
the sentiment of the indolent: else they would put away their carelessness, like
ourselves, who are daily anxious about your affairs. And what gain do you make
by your secular transactions in proportion to the damage you sustain? It is
impossible to depart from any other assembly, or gathering, in the possession of
so much gain as you receive from the time spent here, whether it be the law
court, or council-chamber, or even the palace itself. For we do not commit the
administration of nations or cities nor the command of armies to those who enter
here, but another kind of government more dignified than that of the empire
itself; or rather we do not ourselves commit it, but the grace of the spirit.
What then is the government, more dignified than that of the empire, which
they who enter here receive? They are trained to master untoward passions, to
rule wicked lusts, to command anger, to regulate ill-will, to subdue vainglory.
The emperor, seated on the imperial throne, and wearing his diadem, is not so
dignified as the man who has elevated his own inward right reason to the throne
of government over base passions, and by his dominion over them has bound as
it were a glorious diadem upon his brow. For what profit is there, pray, in purple,