SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.3.

magnanimous man (Ethic. iv) that honor is of little account to him. In
like manner he thinks little of other things that are sought for honor's
sake, such as power and wealth. Likewise it is inconsistent with
magnanimity to glory in things that are not; wherefore it is said of
the magnanimous man (Ethic. iv) that he cares more for truth than
for opinion. Again it is incompatible with magnanimity for a man to
glory in the testimony of human praise, as though he deemed this
something great; wherefore it is said of the magnanimous man
(Ethic. iv), that he cares not to be praised. And so, when a man looks
upon little things as though they were great, nothing hinders this
from being contrary to magnanimity, as well as to other virtues.
Reply to Objection 2: He that is desirous of vainglory does in truth
fall short of being magnanimous, because he glories in what the
magnanimous man thinks little of, as stated in the preceding Reply.
But if we consider his estimate, he is opposed to the magnanimous
man by way of excess, because the glory which he seeks is
something great in his estimation, and he tends thereto in excess of
his deserts.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 127, Article 2, ad 2),
the opposition of vices does not depend on their effects.
Nevertheless contention, if done intentionally, is opposed to
magnanimity: since no one contends save for what he deems great.
Wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3) that the magnanimous
man is not contentious, because nothing is great in his estimation.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether vainglory is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It seems that vainglory is a mortal sin. For nothing
precludes the eternal reward except a mortal sin. Now vainglory
precludes the eternal reward: for it is written (Mt. 6:1): "Take heed,
that you do not give justice before men, to be seen by them:
otherwise you shall not have a reward of your Father Who is in
heaven." Therefore vainglory is a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, whoever appropriates to himself that which is
proper to God, sins mortally. Now by desiring vainglory, a man
appropriates to himself that which is proper to God. For it is written
(Is. 42:8): "I will not give My glory to another," and (1 Tim. 1:17):
"To . . . the only God be honor and glory." Therefore vainglory is a
mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, apparently a sin is mortal if it be most
dangerous and harmful. Now vainglory is a sin of this kind, because
a gloss of Augustine on 1 Thess. 2:4, "God, Who proveth our
hearts," says: "Unless a man war against the love of human glory he
does not perceive its baneful power, for though it be easy for anyone
not to desire praise as long as one does not get it, it is difficult not to
take pleasure in it, when it is given." Chrysostom also says (Hom. xix
in Matth.) that "vainglory enters secretly, and robs us insensibly of
all our inward possessions." Therefore vainglory is a mortal sin.
On the contrary, Chrysostom says [Hom. xiii in Opus Imperfectum]
that "while other vices find their abode in the servants of the devil,
vainglory finds a place even in the servants of Christ." Yet in the
latter there is no mortal sin. Therefore vainglory is not a mortal sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 24, Article 12; Question 110,
Article 4; Question 112, Article 2), a sin is mortal through being
contrary to charity. Now the sin of vainglory, considered in itself,
does not seem to be contrary to charity as regards the love of one's
neighbor: yet as regards the love of God it may be contrary to charity
in two ways. In one way, by reason of the matter about which one
glories: for instance when one glories in something false that is
opposed to the reverence we owe God, according to Ezech. 28:2,
"Thy heart is lifted up, and Thou hast said: I am God," and 1 Cor. 4:7,
"What hast thou that thou hast not received? And if thou hast