break up the fallow ground; if we do not now sow; if we do not now water it
with tears, while it is a time of tribulation and fasting, when shall we ever be
brought to compunction? Will it be when we are at ease, and in luxury? But this
is impossible. For ease and luxury generally lead to indolence, just as tribulation
leads back again to diligence; and restores to itself the mind that had wandered
abroad, and been dreaming after a multitude of objects.
3. Let us not then grieve on account of this despondency, but even give
thanks to God, for great is the gain that comes of tribulation. The husbandman,
when he has sown the seed he had gathered with so much labour, prays that a
shower may come; and the ignorant man, looking on, will be surprised at all that
takes place; and perhaps say to himself, "what can this man be doing? He is
scattering what he has collected; and not only scattering, but he is also mixing it
up in the earth with much industry, so that it will be no easy matter for him to
collect these together again; and besides mixing them with the earth, he is
moreover desiring a heavy rain, so that all he has cast therein will rot, and
become mire." Such a person is also terrified when he observes the thunders
bursting through the clouds, and the lightnings striking downwards. But not so
the farmer. He is glad and rejoices while beholding the heavy rain. For he does
not regard what is present, but awaits the future. He does not attend to the
thunderings, but is reckoning the number of his sheaves. He thinks not of the
decaying seed, but of the flourishing ears of grain; not of the tedious rain, but of
the delightful dust of the threshing floor. Thus indeed, also, should we regard,
not our present tribulation, nor the pain of it, but the benefit that may arise from
it— the fruit that it will bring forth. Let us wait for the sheaves of the threshing
floor; for if we be sober, we shall be able to collect much fruit from the present
time, and to fill the granaries of our minds. If we be sober, we shall not only be
far from taking any harm from this trouble, but we shall also reap innumerable
benefits. But should we be slothful, even tranquillity will destroy us! Either of
these things is injurious to him who takes no heed; but they both profit him who
lives with strictness. And even as gold if it be covered with water, still shows its

own proper beauty, and although it should fall into the furnace, would again
come forth brighter than before; but on the other hand, should clay or grass be
mixed with water, the one dissolves and the other corrupts; and should they fall
into the fire, the one is parched and the other is burnt up; so also in truth it is
with the just man and the sinner! For should the former enjoy repose, he remains
illustrious, even as gold is when immersed in water; and though he falls into
trial, he becomes the more illustrious, like gold when subjected to the test of fire;
but the sinner, if he obtains rest, is enervated and corrupted like the grass and the
clay, when they come in contact with water; and should he undergo trial, he is
burnt up and destroyed, in the same way as the grass and the clay are by the
action of fire!
4. Let us not then be out of heart for the present evils; for if you have any
sins remaining, they will disappear, and easily be burnt up by the tribulation; but
if you possess virtue, you will become thereby more illustrious and
distinguished; for if you are continually vigilant and sober, you will be superior
to all injury. For it is not the nature of the trials, but the listlessness of those who
are tried, that is apt to cause their overthrow. So that if you desire to rejoice, and
to enjoy ease and pleasure, seek neither for pleasure nor ease, but seek for a soul
full of patience, and one that is able to manifest fortitude; since if you have not
this, not only will trial put you to shame, but repose will destroy and overthrow
you yet more signally. For to prove that it is not the attack of evils, but the
listlessness of the mind which subverts our salvation, hear what Christ says:
"Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a
wise man, which built his house upon a rock; and the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not, for it
was founded upon a rock." And again: "Every one who hears these sayings of
mine, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his
house upon the sand; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it."
[Matthew 7:24-27] Do you perceive that it was not the attack of these trials that