the city, and the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king and overtook him,
and they took the king, and brought him to the king of Babylon, and the king of
Babylon gave judgment upon Zedekiah, and slew his sons before his face, and
put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to
Babylon." What is meant by the expression, "he spoke judgment with him?" He
demanded of him an account of his conduct, he pleaded against him; and first he
slew his two sons, that he might be a spectator of the calamity of his house, and
might behold that deplorable tragedy; and then he put out his own eyes. For what
reason, I ask again, did this occur? In order that he might go as a teacher to the
barbarians, and too the Jews who dwelt among them; and that they who had eyes
might discern by him who was bereft of sight, how great an evil is an oath! Nor
only these; but all who dwelt by the way, beholding the man fettered and
blinded, might learn by his calamity the greatness of his sin. Therefore one of the
prophets declares, "He shall not see Babylon." [Ezekiel 12:13] And another, "He
shall be carried away to Babylon." [Jeremiah 32:5] And the prophecy seems,
indeed, to be contradictory. But it is not so; for both of these are true. For he saw
not Babylon, though he was carried away to Babylon. How then did he not see
Babylon? Because it was in Judæa he had his eyes put out; for where the oath
had been set at nought, there also was it vindicated, and he himself subjected to
punishment. And how was he carried away to Babylon? In a state of captivity.
For since the punishment was twofold, deprivation of sight and captivity, the
prophets took them severally. The one says, "He shall not see Babylon,"
speaking of the loss of his eyes; the other says, "He shall be carried away to
Babylon," signifying his captivity.
12. Knowing these things, then, brethren, and gathering up what has been
now advanced, as well as what has been said before; let us at last desist from this
evil custom, yea, I pray and beseech you all! For if in the old dispensation, when
the Jews had not the strictest moral wisdom required of them, but much
condescension was extended to them, such wrath was the effect of one oath;
such capture and captivity; what punishment is it likely that those who swear

should now be subjected to, after an express law forbidding the practice, and so
large an addition of precepts. Is it, indeed, all that is required, that we come to
the assembly, and hear what is spoken? Why truly it is a reason for greater
condemnation, and for more inevitable punishment, that we are continually
hearing, and yet do not what is bidden! What excuse shall we have, or what
pardon, if assembling here from earliest youth to latest old age, and enjoying the
advantage of so much instruction, we remain just like them, and do not take
pains to correct a single defect. Let no one henceforth allege custom. For this is
the very thing at which I am indignant and provoked, that we are not able to get
the better of custom. And, pray, if we do not get the better of custom, how can
we get the better of concupiscence, which has its root even in the principles of
our nature; for it is natural to feel desire; but to desire wickedly, comes after of
choice. But this practice of swearing takes not even its first principle from
nature, but from mere negligence.
13. And that you may learn that not from the difficulty of the thing, but
through our inattention, this sin has advanced to such a pitch, let us call to mind
how many things far more difficult than these, men accomplish; and that too
without expecting any recompense therefrom. Let us think what services the
Devil imposes; how laborious, how troublesome they are; and yet, the difficulty
has not become an obstacle to these services. For what can be more difficult, I
ask, than when any young person delivering himself up to those, who undertake
to make his limbs supple and pliant, uses his most strenuous exertion to bend his
whole body into the exact shape of a wheel, and to turn over upon the pavement;
his powers being tasked at the same time through the eyes, and through the
movement of the hands, as well as other convolutions for the purpose of being
transformed into the likeness of woman-kind. Yet neither the difficulty of these
feats, nor the degradation arising from them, are thought of. And again, those
who are dragged upon the dancing-stage, and use the members of the body as
though they were wings, who that beholds them can help being struck with
wonder? So too they who toss knives aloft in the air one after another, and catch