Reply to Objection 1: Joy and sorrow about the same thing are
opposites, but not about different things. Hence there is nothing to
hinder a man from being sorry for one thing, and joyful for another;
especially so far as sorrow and joy imply simple acts of the will;
because, not merely in different things, but even in one and the same
thing, there can be something that we will, and something that we
will not.
Reply to Objection 2: As there is sorrow in the demons over present
evil, so also there is fear of future evil. Now when it is said, "He was
made to fear no one," this is to be understood of the fear of God
which restrains from sin. For it is written elsewhere that "the devils
believe and tremble" (James 2:19).
Reply to Objection 3: To be sorry for the evil of sin on account of the
sin bears witness to the goodness of the will, to which the evil of sin
is opposed. But to be sorry for the evil of punishment, for the evil of
sin on account of the punishment, bears witness to the goodness of
nature, to which the evil of punishment is opposed. Hence Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xix, 13), that "sorrow for good lost by punishment,
is the witness to a good nature." Consequently, since the demon has
a perverse and obstinate will, he is not sorry for the evil of sin.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether our atmosphere is the demons' place of

punishment?
Objection 1: It would seem that this atmosphere is not the demons'
place of punishment. For a demon is a spiritual nature. But a
spiritual nature is not affected by place. Therefore there is no place
of punishment for demons.
Objection 2: Further, man's sin is not graver than the demons'. But
man's place of punishment is hell. Much more, therefore, is it the
demons' place of punishment; and consequently not the darksome
atmosphere.
Objection 3: Further, the demons are punished with the pain of fire.
But there is no fire in the darksome atmosphere. Therefore the
darksome atmosphere is not the place of punishment for the
demons.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iii, 10), that "the
darksome atmosphere is as a prison to the demons until the
judgment day."
I answer that, The angels in their own nature stand midway between
God and men. Now the order of Divine providence so disposes, that
it procures the welfare of the inferior orders through the superior.
But man's welfare is disposed by Divine providence in two ways:
first of all, directly, when a man is brought unto good and withheld
from evil; and this is fittingly done through the good angels. In
another way, indirectly, as when anyone assailed is exercised by
fighting against opposition. It was fitting for this procuring of man's
welfare to be brought about through the wicked spirits, lest they
should cease to be of service in the natural order. Consequently a
twofold place of punishment is due to the demons: one, by reason of
their sin, and this is hell; and another, in order that they may tempt
men, and thus the darksome atmosphere is their due place of
punishment.
Now the procuring of men's salvation is prolonged even to the
judgment day: consequently, the ministry of the angels and
wrestling with demons endure until then. Hence until then the good
angels are sent to us here; and the demons are in this dark