Further, the same person does not both give and receive a dowry.
But it is Christ Who gives spiritual dowries. Therefore it is not fitting
that Christ should have a dowry.
I answer that, There are two opinions on this point. For some say
that there is a threefold union in Christ. One is the union of concord,
whereby He is united to God in the bond of love; another is the union
of condescension, whereby the human nature is united to the Divine;
the third is the union whereby Christ is united to the Church. They
say, then, that as regards the first two unions it is fitting for Christ to
have the dowries as such, but as regards the third, it is fitting for
Him to have the dowries in the most excellent degree, considered as
to that in which they consist, but not considered as dowries;
because in this union Christ is the bridegroom and the Church the
bride, and a dowry is given to the bride as regards property and
control, although it is given to the bridegroom as to use. But this
does not seem congruous. For in the union of Christ with the Father
by the concord of love, even if we consider Him as God, there is not
said to be a marriage, since it implies no subjection such as is
required in the bride towards the bridegroom. Nor again in the union
of the human nature with the Divine, whether we consider the
Personal union or that which regards the conformity of will, can
there be a dowry, properly speaking, for three reasons. First,
because in a marriage where a dowry is given there should be
likeness of nature between bridegroom and bride, and this is lacking
in the union of the human nature with the Divine; secondly, because
there is required a distinction of persons, and the human nature is
not personally distinct from the Word; thirdly, because a dowry is
given when the bride is first taken to the dwelling of the bridegroom
and thus would seem to belong to the bride, who from being not
united becomes united; whereas the human nature, which was
assumed into the unity of Person by the Word, never was otherwise
than perfectly united. Wherefore in the opinion of others we should
say that the notion of dowry is either altogether unbecoming to
Christ, or not so properly as to the saints; but that the things which
we call dowries befit Him in the highest degree.
Reply to Objection 1: This conformity must be understood to refer to
the thing which is a dowry and not to the notion of a dowry being in
Christ: for it is not requisite that the thing in which we are conformed
to Christ should be in the same way in Christ and in us.

Reply to Objection 2: Human nature is not properly said to be a bride
in its union with the Word, since the distinction of persons, which is
requisite between bridegroom and bride, is not observed therein.
That human nature is sometimes described as being espoused in
reference to its union with the Word is because it has a certain act of
the bride, in that it is united to the Bridegroom inseparably, and in
this union is subject to the Word and ruled by the Word, as the bride
by the bridegroom.
Reply to Objection 3: If Christ is sometimes spoken of as the Bride,
this is not because He is the Bride in very truth, but in so far as He
personifies His spouse, namely the Church, who is united to Him
spiritually. Hence nothing hinders Him, in this way of speaking, from
being said to have the dowries, not that He Himself is dowered, but
the Church.
Reply to Objection 4: The term Church is taken in two senses. For
sometimes it denotes the body only, which is united to Christ as its
Head. In this way alone has the Church the character of spouse: and
in this way Christ is not a member of the Church, but is the Head
from which all the members receive. In another sense the Church
denotes the head and members united together; and thus Christ is
said to be a member of the Church, inasmuch as He fulfills an office
distinct from all others, by pouring forth life into the other members:
although He is not very properly called a member, since a member
implies a certain restriction, whereas in Christ spiritual good is not
restricted but is absolutely entire [TP, Question 8, Article 1], so that
He is the entire good of the Church, nor is He together with others
anything greater than He is by Himself. Speaking of the Church in
this sense, the Church denotes not only the bride, but the
bridegroom and bride, in so far as one thing results from their
spiritual union. Consequently although Christ be called a member of
the Church in a certain sense, He can by no means be called a
member of the bride; and therefore the idea of a dowry is not
becoming to Him.
Reply to Objection 5: There is here a fallacy of "accident"; for these
things are not befitting to Christ if we consider them under the
aspect of dowry.