SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.6.

immediately before the Paschal feast; and for the same reason, on
the eve of the chief festivals, because it is then that one ought to
make ready to keep the coming feast devoutly. Again it is the custom
in the Church for Holy orders to be conferred every quarter of the
year (in sign whereof our Lord fed four thousand men with seven
loaves, which signify the New Testament year as Jerome says
[Comment. in Marc. viii]): and then both the ordainer, and the
candidates for ordination, and even the whole people, for whose
good they are ordained, need to fast in order to make themselves
ready for the ordination. Hence it is related (Lk. 6:12) that before
choosing His disciples our Lord "went out into a mountain to pray":
and Ambrose [Exposit. in Luc.] commenting on these words says:
"What shouldst thou do, when thou desirest to undertake some
pious work, since Christ prayed before sending His apostles?"
With regard to the forty day's fast, according to Gregory (Hom. xvi in
Evang.) there are three reasons for the number. First, "because the
power of the Decalogue is accomplished in the four books of the
Holy Gospels: since forty is the product of ten multiplied by four." Or
"because we are composed of four elements in this mortal body
through whose lusts we transgress the Lord's commandments which
are delivered to us in the Decalogue. Wherefore it is fitting we should
punish that same body forty times. or, because, just as under the
Law it was commanded that tithes should be paid of things, so we
strive to pay God a tithe of days, for since a year is composed of
three hundred and sixty-six days, by punishing ourselves for thirtysix days" (namely, the fasting days during the six weeks of Lent) "we
pay God a tithe of our year." According to Augustine (De Doctr.
Christ. ii, 16) a fourth reason may be added. For the Creator is the
"Trinity," Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: while the number "three"
refers to the invisible creature, since we are commanded to love
God, with our whole heart, with our whole soul, and with our whole
mind: and the number "four" refers to the visible creature, by reason
of heat, cold, wet and dry. Thus the number "ten" signifies all things,
and if this be multiplied by four which refers to the body whereby we
make use of things, we have the number forty.
Each fast of the Ember days is composed of three days, on account
of the number of months in each season: or on account of the
number of Holy orders which are conferred at these times.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ needed not baptism for His own sake,
but in order to commend baptism to us. Wherefore it was competent

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.6.

for Him to fast, not before, but after His baptism, in order to invite us
to fast before our baptism.
Reply to Objection 2: The Church keeps the Ember fasts, neither at
the very same time as the Jews, nor for the same reasons. For they
fasted in July, which is the fourth month from April (which they
count as the first), because it was then that Moses coming down
from Mount Sinai broke the tables of the Law (Ex. 32), and that,
according to Jer. 39:2, "the walls of the city were first broken
through." In the fifth month, which we call August, they fasted
because they were commanded not to go up on to the mountain,
when the people had rebelled on account of the spies (Num. 14): also
in this month the temple of Jerusalem was burnt down by
Nabuchodonosor (Jer. 52) and afterwards by Titus. In the seventh
month which we call October, Godolias was slain, and the remnants
of the people were dispersed (Jer. 51). In the tenth month, which we
call January, the people who were with Ezechiel in captivity heard of
the destruction of the temple (Ezech. 4).
Reply to Objection 3: The "fasting of joy" proceeds from the
instigation of the Holy Ghost Who is the Spirit of liberty, wherefore
this fasting should not be a matter of precept. Accordingly the fasts
appointed by the commandment of the Church are rather "fasts of
sorrow" which are inconsistent with days of joy. For this reason
fasting is not ordered by the Church during the whole of the Paschal
season, nor on Sundays: and if anyone were to fast at these times in
contradiction to the custom of Christian people, which as Augustine
declares (Ep. xxxvi) "is to be considered as law," or even through
some erroneous opinion (thus the Manichees fast, because they
deem such fasting to be of obligation)---he would not be free from
sin. Nevertheless fasting considered in itself is commendable at all
times; thus Jerome wrote (Ad Lucin., Ep. lxxi): "Would that we might
fast always."