lest you spoil his zeal. But if, before he had provided them, he were to tell you of
it, command it to be given to the poor; forasmuch as He also did this not to spoil
the spirit of the woman, and as many things as He says, He speaks for her
comfort.
Then because He had said, "She has done it for my burial;" that He might
not seem to perplex the woman, by making mention of such a thing as this, His
burial and death, I mean; see how by that which follows He recovers her, saying,
"What she has done shall be spoken of in the whole world."
And this was at once consolation to His disciples, and comfort and praise to
her. For all men, He says, shall celebrate her hereafter; and now too has she
announced beforehand my passion, by bringing unto me what was needed for a
funeral, let not therefore any man reprove her. For I am so far from condemning
her as having done amiss, or from blaming her as having not acted rightly, that I
will not suffer what has been done to lie hidden, but the world shall know that
which has been done in a house, and in secret. For in truth the deed came of a
reverential mind, and fervent faith, and a contrite soul.
And wherefore did He promise the woman nothing spiritual; but the
perpetual memory? From this He is causing her to feel a confidence about the
other things also. For if she has wrought a good work, it is quite evident she shall
receive a due reward.
"Then went one of the twelve, he that was called Judas Iscariot, unto the
chief priests, and said unto them, What will you give me, and I will deliver Him
unto you?" Then. When? When these things were spoken, when He had said, it
is for my burial, and not even thereby was he moved to compunction, neither
when he heard that the Gospel should be preached everywhere did he fear (and
yet it was the language of unspeakable power), but when women showed so
much honor, and women that had been harlots, then he wrought the devil's
works.
But what can be the reason they mention his surname? Because there was
also another Judas. And they do not shrink from saying, He was of the twelve; so

entirely do they hide none of those things which seem to be matters of reproach.
And yet they might have said merely this, that he was one of the disciples, for
there were others besides. But now they add, of the twelve, as though they had
said, of the first company of those selected as the best, of them with Peter and
John. Because for one thing did they care, for truth alone, not for concealing
what things were done.
For this cause many of the signs they pass by, but of the things that appear
to be matters of reproach they conceal nothing; but though it be word, though it
be deed, though it be what you will of this kind, they proclaim it with
confidence.
3. And not these only, but even John himself, who utters the higher
doctrines. For he most of all tells us of the affronts and the reproachful things
that were done unto Him.
And see how great is the wickedness of Judas, in that he comes unto them
of his own accord, in that he does this for money, and for such a sum of money.
But Luke says, that he conferred with the chief captains. For after that the
Jews became seditious, the Romans set over them those that should provide for
their good order. For their government had now undergone a change according to
the prophecy.
To these then he went and said, "What will you give me, and I will deliver
him unto you. And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. And from
that time he sought opportunity to betray Him." For indeed he was afraid of the
multitude, and desired to seize him alone.
Oh madness! How did covetousness altogether blind him! For he that had
often seen Him when He went through the midst, and was not seized, and when
He afforded many demonstrations of His Godhead and power, looked to lay hold
on Him; and this while He was using like a charm for him so many, both awful
and soothing words, to put an end to this evil thought. For not even at the supper
did He forbear from this care of him, but unto the last day discoursed to him of
these things. But he profited nothing. Yet not for that did the Lord cease to do