interrupting their punishment, but by fortifying the person punished:
even as a man who is carrying a heavy load might bathe his face in
water, for thus he would be enabled to carry it better, and yet his
load would be none the lighter. But this again is impossible, because
according to Gregory (Moral. ix) a man suffers more or less from the
eternal fire according as his guilt deserves; and consequently some
suffer more, some less, from the same fire. wherefore since the guilt
of the damned remains unchanged, it cannot be that he suffers less
punishment. Moreover, the aforesaid opinion is presumptuous, as
being in opposition to the statements of holy men, and groundless
as being based on no authority. It is also unreasonable. First,
because the damned in hell are cut off from the bond of charity in
virtue of which the departed are in touch with the works of the living.
Secondly, because they have entirely come to the end of life, and
have received the final award for their merits, even as the saints who
are in heaven. For the remaining punishment or glory of the body
does not make them to be wayfarers, since glory essentially and
radically resides in the soul. It is the same with the unhappiness of
the damned, wherefore their punishment cannot be diminished as
neither can the glory of the saints be increased as to the essential
reward.
However, we may admit, in a certain measure, the manner in which,
according to some, suffrages profit the damned, if it be said that they
profit neither by diminishing nor interrupting their punishment, nor
again by diminishing their sense of punishment, but by withdrawing
from the damned some matter of grief, which matter they might have
if they knew themselves to be so outcast as to be a care to no one;
and this matter of grief is withdrawn from them when suffrages are
offered for them. Yet even this is impossible according to the general
law, because as Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort. xiii)---and this
applies especially to the damned---"the spirits of the departed are
where they see nothing of what men do or of what happens to them
in this life," and consequently they know not when suffrages are
offered for them, unless this relief be granted from above to some of
the damned in spite of the general law. This, however, is a matter of
great uncertainty; wherefore it is safer to say simply that suffrages
profit not the damned, nor does the Church intend to pray for them,
as appears from the authors quoted above.
Reply to Objection 1: The donaries to the idols were not found on
those dead so that they might be taken as a sign that they were
carried off in reverence to the idols: but they took them as

conquerors because they were due to them by right of war. They
sinned, however, venially by covetousness: and consequently they
were not damned in hell, and thus suffrages could profit them. or we
may say, according to some, that in the midst of fighting, seeing they
were in danger, they repented of their sin, according to Ps. 77:34,
"When He slew them, then they sought Him": and this is a probable
opinion. Wherefore the offering was made for them.
Reply to Objection 2: In these words damnation is taken in a broad
sense for any kind of punishment, so as to include also the
punishment of purgatory which is sometimes entirely expiated by
suffrages, and sometimes not entirety, but diminished.
Reply to Objection 3: Suffrage for a dead person is more acceptable
than for a living person, as regards his being in greater want, since
he cannot help himself as a living person can. But a living person is
better off in that he can be taken from the state of mortal sin to the
state of grace, which cannot be said of the dead. Hence there is not
the same reason for praying for the dead as for the living.
Reply to Objection 4: This assistance did not consist in a
diminishment of their punishment, but in this alone (as stated in the
same place) that when he prayed they were permitted to see one
another, and in this they had a certain joy, not real but imaginary, in
the fulfillment of their desire. Even so the demons are said to rejoice
when they draw men into sin, although this nowise diminishes their
punishment, as neither is the joy of the angels diminished by the fact
that they take pity on our ills.
Reply to Objection 5: Concerning the incident of Trajan it may be
supposed with probability that he was recalled to life at the prayers
of blessed Gregory, and thus obtained the grace whereby he
received the pardon of his sins and in consequence was freed from
punishment. The same applies to all those who were miraculously
raised from the dead, many of whom were evidently idolaters and
damned. For we must needs say likewise of all such persons that
they were consigned to hell, not finally, but as was actually due to
their own merits according to justice: and that according to higher
causes, in view of which it was foreseen that they would be recalled
to life, they were to be disposed of otherwise.
Or we may say with some that Trajan's soul was not simply freed