Therefore the prophet also blaming you, said, "Your eyes are not good,
neither is your heart."
It were better for such men to be blind; it were better to be diseased, than to
abuse your eyes for these purposes.
It were meet indeed that you had within you the wall to part you from the
women; but since you are not so minded, our fathers thought it necessary by
these boards to wall you off; since I hear from the elder ones, that of old there
were not so much as these partitions; "For in Christ Jesus there is neither male
nor female." And in the apostle's time also both men and women were together.
Because the men were men, and the women women, but now altogether the
contrary; the women have urged themselves into the manners of courtezans, but
the men are in no better state than frantic horses.
Heard ye not, that the men and women were gathered together in the upper
room, and that congregation was worthy of the heavens? And very reasonably.
For even women then practised much self-denial, and the men gravity and
chastity. Hear, for instance, the seller of purple saying, "If you have judged me to
be faithful to the Lord, come in, and abide with me." Hear the women, who went
about with the apostles, having taken unto themselves manly courage, Priscilla,
Persis, and the rest; from whom our present women are as far removed as our
men from their men.
4. For then indeed even travelling into far countries women brought not on
themselves evil report; but now even though brought up in a chamber, they
hardly escape this suspicion. But these things arise from their decking of
themselves, and their luxury. Then the business of those women was to spread
the word; but now to appear beauteous, and fair, and comely in countenance.
This is glory to them, this salvation; but of lofty and great works they do not
even dream.
What woman exerts herself to make her husband better? What man has
taken to himself this care to amend his wife? There is not one: but the woman's
whole study is upon the care of ornaments of gold, and raiment, and the other

adornments of the person, and how to increase their substance; but the man's
both this, and others more than this, all however worldly.
Who, when about to marry, inquires about the disposition and nurture of the
damsel? No one; but straightway about money, and possessions, and measures of
property of various and different kinds; like as if he were about to buy
something, or to settle some common contract.
Therefore they do even so call marriage. For I have heard many say, such a
man has contracted with such a woman, that is, has married. And they offer
insult to the gifts of God, and as though buying and selling, so do they marry,
and are given in marriage.
And writings there are, requiring greater security than those about buying
and selling. Learn how those of old married, and imitate them. How then did
they marry? They inquired about ways of life, and morals, and virtue of the soul.
Therefore they had no need of writings, nor of security by parch ment and ink;
for the bride's disposition sufficed them in the place of all.
I therefore entreat you likewise not to seek after wealth and affluence, but a
good disposition, and gentleness. Seek for a pious and self-denying damsel, and
these will be to you better than countless treasures. If you seek the things of
God, these others will come also; but if you pass by those, and hasten unto these,
neither will these follow.
But such a man, one will say, became rich by his wife! Are you not
ashamed of bringing forward such examples? I had ten thousand times sooner
become a poor man, as I have heard many say, than gain wealth from a wife. For
what can be more unpleasing than that wealth? What more painful than the
abundance? What more shameful than to be notorious from thence, and for it to
be said by all, such a man became rich by a wife? For the domestic discomforts I
pass by, all that must needs result from hence, the wife's pride, the servility, the
strifes, the reproaches of the servants. "The beggar," "the ragged one," "the base
one, and sprung of base." "Why, what had he when he came in?" "Do not all
things belong to our mistress?" But thou dost not care at all about these sayings,