us look, to the never seek the praise of men; but if it falls to us, we shall despise,
deride, and reject it. We shall be affected as those who desire gold, but receive
clay. Let not any one praise you, for it profits nothing; and if he blame you, it
harms you not. But with God praise and blame are attended with real gain and
loss, while all is vain that proceeds from men. And herein we are made like God,
that He needs not glory from men. "I receive not," said Christ, "honor from
men." [John 5:41] Is this then a light thing, tell me? When you are unwilling to
despise glory, say, "By despising it, I shall resemble God," and immediately you
will despise it. But it is impossible that the slave of glory should not be a slave to
all, more servile than slaves in reality. For we do not impose upon our slaves
such tasks, as glory exacts from her captives. Base and shameful are the things
she makes them say, and do, and suffer, and when she sees them obedient, she is
the more urgent in her commands.
Let us fly then, I entreat you, let us fly from this slavery. But how shall we
be able? If we think seriously of what is in this world, if we observe that things
present are a dream, a shadow, and nothing better; we shall easily overcome this
desire, and neither in little nor in great things shall be led captive by it. But if in
little things we do not despise it, we shall easily be overcome by it in the most
important. Let us therefore remove far from us the sources of it, and these are,
folly, and meanness of mind, so that, if we assume a lofty spirit, we shall be able
to look beyond honor from the multitude, and to extend our views to heaven, and
obtain the good things there. Of which God grant that we may all be partakers,
by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 3 on Titus

[Titus 1:12-14]
"One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, The Cretians are
always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies. This witness is true. Wherefore rebuke
them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith; Not giving heed to Jewish
fables, and commandments of men, that turn from the truth."
There are several questions here. First, who it was that said this? Secondly,
why Paul quoted it? Thirdly, why he brings forward a testimony that is not
correct? Let us then offer a seasonable solution of these, having premised some
other things. For when Paul was discoursing to the Athenians, in the course of
his harangue he quoted these words, "To the Unknown God": and again, "For we
also are His offspring, as certain also of your own poets have said." [Acts 17:2328] It was Epimenides who said this, himself a Cretan, and whence he was move
moved to say it is necessary to mention. It is this. The Cretans have a tomb of
Jupiter, with this inscription. "Here lies Zan, whom they call Jove." On account
of this inscription, then, the poet ridiculing the Cretans as liars, as he proceeds,
introduces, to increase the ridicule, this passage.
For even a tomb, O King, of you
They made, who never died, but aye shall be.
If then this testimony is true, observe what a difficulty! For if the poet is
true who said that they spoke falsely, in asserting that Jupiter could die, as the
Apostle says, it is a fearful thing! Attend, beloved, with much exactness. The
poet said that the Cretans were liars for saying that Jupiter was dead. The
Apostle confirmed his testimony: so, according to the Apostle, Jupiter is
immortal: for he says, "this witness is true"! What shall we say then? Or rather
how shall we solve this? The Apostle has not said this, but simply and plainly