of understanding which is not naturally complete, but is
successively completed in them by their drawing intelligible species
from things. But in the higher spiritual substances---that is, the
angels---the power of understanding is naturally complete by
intelligible species, in so far as they have such species connatural to
them, so as to understand all things which they can know naturally.
The same is evident from the manner of existence of such
substances. The lower spiritual substances---that is, souls---have a
nature akin to a body, in so far as they are the forms of bodies: and
consequently from their very mode of existence it behooves them to
seek their intelligible perfection from bodies, and through bodies;
otherwise they would be united with bodies to no purpose. On the
other hand, the higher substances---that is, the angels---are utterly
free from bodies, and subsist immaterially and in their own
intelligible nature; consequently they attain their intelligible
perfection through an intelligible outpouring, whereby they received
from God the species of things known, together with their
intellectual nature. Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ii, 8): "The
other things which are lower than the angels are so created that they
first receive existence in the knowledge of the rational creature, and
then in their own nature."
Reply to Objection 1: There are images of creatures in the angel's
mind, not, indeed derived from creatures, but from God, Who is the
cause of creatures, and in Whom the likenesses of creatures first
exist. Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ii, 8) that, "As the type,
according to which the creature is fashioned, is in the Word of God
before the creature which is fashioned, so the knowledge of the
same type exists first in the intellectual creature, and is afterwards
the very fashioning of the creature."
Reply to Objection 2: To go from one extreme to the other it is
necessary to pass through the middle. Now the nature of a form in
the imagination, which form is without matter but not without
material conditions, stands midway between the nature of a form
which is in matter, and the nature of a form which is in the intellect
by abstraction from matter and from material conditions.
Consequently, however powerful the angelic mind might be, it could
not reduce material forms to an intelligible condition, except it were
first to reduce them to the nature of imagined forms; which is
impossible, since the angel has no imagination, as was said above
(Question 54, Article 5). Even granted that he could abstract

intelligible species from material things, yet he would not do so;
because he would not need them, for he has connatural intelligible
species.
Reply to Objection 3: The angel's knowledge is quite indifferent as to
what is near or distant. Nevertheless his local movement is not
purposeless on that account: for he is not moved to a place for the
purpose of acquiring knowledge, but for the purpose of operation.