beaten we get the better of our beaters, if driven out we overcome our
persecutors, if dying we put the living to fight. For when you take the power and
also the love of God into account, there is nothing to prevent these wondrous and
strange things from coming to pass, and that victory the most advantageous
should shine upon us. For they did not merely conquer, but in a wondrous way,
and so that one might learn that those who plotted against them had a war not
against men, but against that invincible Might. See the Jews then with these
among them, and at a loss quite, and saying, "What are we to do to these men?"
[Acts 4:16] For it is marvellous indeed, that though they had hold of them and
had got them liable to their courts, and imprisoned them and beat them, they
were yet at a loss and in perplexity, as they got overcome by the very things
whereby they expected to conquer. And neither kings nor people, nor ranks of
demons, nor the devil himself, had power to get the better of them, but were all
overcome at a very great disadvantage, finding that all they planned against them
became for them. And therefore he says, "we are more than conquerors." For
this was a new rule of victory for men to prevail by their adversaries, and in no
instance to be overcome, but to go forth to these struggles as if they themselves
had the issue in their own hands.
Ver. 38, 39. "For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."
These are great things here mentioned. But the reason we do not enter into
them is, because we have not so great love. Yet still though they are great, as he
wished to show that they were nothing beside the love wherewith he was loved
of God; after it he then places his own, lest he should seem to be saying great
things about himself. And what he says is somewhat of this kind. Why speak, he
means, of things present, and evils inherited in this life? For even if a person
were to tell me of things to come, and of powers; of things, such as death and
life; of powers, such as angels and archangels, and all the superior orders of

beings; even these would be little to me compared with the love of Christ. For
even if a person were to threaten me with that future death to which there is no
death, to separate me from Christ, nor if he promised the life without end, would
I agree to it. Why mention kings here below and consuls? And this one or that?
For if you tell me of angels, or all the powers above, or all existing things, or all
that are to come, they are all small to me, both those in the earth, and those in
heaven, and those under the earth, and those above heaven, compared to this
charm. Then as though these were not enough to set before them the strong
desire which he had, he gives a being to others again of like magnitude, and
says, "nor any other creation." And what he means is nearly this, even if there
were any other creation as great as the visible, and as great as the intelligible,
none of them could part me from that love. This he says not as if the Angels
attempted it, or the other Powers, far from it, but as wishing to show quite to the
utmost the charm he had toward Christ. For Christ he loved not for the things of
Christ, but for His sake the things that were His, and to Him alone he looked,
and one thing he feared, and that was falling from his love for Him. For this
thing was in itself more dreadful than hell, as to abide in it was more desirable
than the Kingdom.
What then should we now deserve, when he is found not to esteem even the
things in Heaven as compared with the desire for Christ, and we set more store
by things of mire and clay than by Christ? And he out of desire of Him would
take up with falling into hell, and being banished from the Kingdom, if the
choice between the two were put to him: but we are not even above the present
life. Are we worthy then to touch his very shoes, when we have come to be so
far short of his largeness of mind? For he for Christ's sake does not think
anything even of a kingdom; but we think slightingly of Himself, but things of
His we make great account of. And would it were of things of His. But now it is
not even this; but with a Kingdom held out to us, we let that alone, and keep
pursuing shadows and dreams all our days. And yet God in His love toward man
and exceeding gentleness, has done the same as if an affectionate father should,