THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether, by her sanctification in the womb, the

Blessed Virgin received the fulness of grace?
Objection 1: It would seem that, by her sanctification in the womb,
the Blessed Virgin did not receive the fulness or perfection of grace.
For this seems to be Christ's privilege, according to Jn. 1:14: "We
saw Him as the Only-Begotten full of grace and truth." But what is
proper to Christ ought not to be ascribed to some one else.
Therefore the Blessed Virgin did not receive the fulness of grace at
the time of her sanctification.
Objection 2: Further, nothing remains to be added to that which is
full and perfect: for "the perfect is that which lacks nothing," as is
said Phys. iii. But the Blessed Virgin received additional grace
afterwards when she conceived Christ; for to her was it said (Lk.
1:35): "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee: and again, when she
was assumed into glory." Therefore it seems that she did not receive
the fulness of grace at the time of her first sanctification.
Objection 3: Further, "God does nothing useless," as is said De
Coelo et Mundo i. But it would have been useless for her to have
certain graces, for she would never have put them to use: since we
do not read that she taught which is the act of wisdom; or that she
worked miracles, which is the act of one of the gratuitous graces.
Therefore she had not the fulness of grace.
On the contrary, The angel said to her: "Hail, full of grace" (Lk. 1:28);
which words Jerome expounds as follows, in a sermon on the
Assumption (cf. Ep. ad Paul. et Eustoch.): "Full indeed of grace: for
to others it is given in portions; whereas on Mary the fulness of
grace was showered all at once."
I answer that, In every genus, the nearer a thing is to the principle,
the greater the part which it has in the effect of that principle,
whence Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv) that angels, being nearer to
God, have a greater share than men, in the effects of the Divine
goodness. Now Christ is the principle of grace, authoritatively as to
His Godhead, instrumentally as to His humanity: whence (Jn. 1:17) it
is written: "Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." But the Blessed
Virgin Mary was nearest to Christ in His humanity: because He
received His human nature from her. Therefore it was due to her to

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.6.

receive a greater fulness of grace than others.
Reply to Objection 1: God gives to each one according to the
purpose for which He has chosen him. And since Christ as man was
predestinated and chosen to be "predestinated the Son of God in
power . . . of sanctification" (Rm. 1:4), it was proper to Him to have
such a fulness of grace that it overflowed from Him into all,
according to Jn. 1:16: "Of His fulness we have all received." Whereas
the Blessed Virgin Mary received such a fulness of grace that she
was nearest of all to the Author of grace; so that she received within
her Him Who is full of all grace; and by bringing Him forth, she, in a
manner, dispensed grace to all.
Reply to Objection 2: In natural things at first there is perfection of
disposition, for instance when matter is perfectly disposed for the
form. Secondly, there is the perfection of the form; and this is the
more excellent, for the heat that proceeds from the form of fire is
more perfect than that which disposed to the form of fire. Thirdly,
there is the perfection of the end: for instance when fire has its
qualities in the most perfect degree, having mounted to its own
place.
In like manner there was a threefold perfection of grace in the
Blessed Virgin. The first was a kind of disposition, by which she was
made worthy to be the mother of Christ: and this was the perfection
of her sanctification. The second perfection of grace in the Blessed
Virgin was through the presence of the Son of God Incarnate in her
womb. The third perfection of the end is that which she has in glory.
That the second perfection excels the first, and the third the second,
appears (1) from the point of view of deliverance from evil. For at
first in her sanctification she was delivered from original sin:
afterwards, in the conception of the Son of God, she was entirely
cleansed from the fomes: lastly, in her glorification she was also
delivered from all affliction whatever. It appears (2) from the point of
view of ordering to good. For at first in her sanctification she
received grace inclining her to good: in the conception of the Son of
God she received consummate grace confirming her in good; and in
her glorification her grace was further consummated so as to perfect
her in the enjoyment of all good.
Reply to Objection 3: There is no doubt that the Blessed Virgin