says by the mouth of the prophet: "Declare first your iniquities that you may be
justified." [Isaiah 43:26] Now this He demands from us in order to intensify our
love towards Him. For when one who loves, after enduring many insults at the
hands of those who are beloved, even then does not extinguish his fondness for
them, the only reason why he takes pains to make those insults public, is that by
displaying the strength of his affection he may induce them to feel a larger and
warmer love. Now if the confession of sins brings so much consolation, much
more does the endeavour to wash them away by means of our deeds. For if this
was not the case, but those who had once swerved from the straight path were
forbidden to return to it again, perhaps no one, except a few persons whose
numbers would be easily reckoned, would ever enter the kingdom of Heaven;
but as it is we shall find the most distinguished among those who have fallen.
For those who have exhibited much vehemence in evil things, will also in turn
exhibit the same in good things, being conscious what great debts they have
incurred; which Christ also declared when He spoke to Simon concerning the
woman: "For do you see," says He, "this woman? I entered into your house, you
gave me no water for my feet; but she has washed my feet with her tears, and
wiped them with the hairs of her head. You gave me no kiss, but she since the
time I came in has not ceased to kiss my feet. Mine head with oil thou did not
anoint; but she has anointed my feet with ointment. Wherefore I say unto you:
her sins which are many are forgiven; for she loved much; but to whom little is
forgiven, the same loves little. And He said unto her, your sins are forgiven."
[Luke 7:44-48]
16. For this reason also the devil, knowing that they who have committed
great evils, when they have begun to repent, do this with much zeal, inasmuch as
they are conscious of their offenses, fears and trembles lest they should make a
beginning of the work; for after they have made it they are no longer capable of
being checked, and, kindling like fire under the influence of repentance, they
render their souls purer than pure gold, being impelled by their conscience, and
the memory of their former sins, as by some strong gale, towards the haven of

virtue. And this is the point in which they have an advantage over those who
have never fallen, that they exercise more vehement energy; if only, as I said,
they can lay hold of the beginning. For the task which is hard and difficult of
accomplishment is to be able to set foot on the entrance, and to reach the
vestibule of repentance, and to repulse and overthrow the enemy there when he
is fiercely raging and assaulting us. But after this, he will not display so much
fury when he has once been worsted, and has fallen where he was strong, and we
shall receive greater energy, and shall run this good race with much ease. Let us
then in future set about our return, let us hasten up to the city which is in
Heaven, in which we have been enrolled, in which also we have been appointed
to find our home as citizens. For to despair of ourselves not only has this evil
that it shuts the gates of that city against us, and that it drives us into greater
indolence and contempt, but also that it plunges us into Satanic recklessness. For
the only cause why the devil became such as he is was that he first of all
despaired, and afterwards from despair sank into recklessness. For the soul,
when once it has abandoned its own salvation, will no longer perceive that it is
plunging downwards, choosing to do and say everything which is adverse to its
own salvation. And just as madmen, when once they have fallen out of a sound
condition, are neither afraid nor ashamed of anything, but fearlessly dare all
manner of things, even if they have to fall into fire, or deep water, or down a
precipice; so they who have been seized by the frenzy of despair are hence
forward unmanageable, rushing into vice in every direction, and if death does
not come to put a stop to this madness, and vehemence, they do themselves
infinite mischief. Therefore I entreat you, before you are deeply steeped in this
drunkenness, recover your senses and rouse yourself up, and shake off this
Satanic fit, doing it gently and gradually if it be not possible to effect it all at
once. For to me indeed the easier course seems to be to wrench yourself once for
all out of all the cords which hold you down, and transfer yourself to the school
of repentance. But if this seems to you a difficult thing, that you should be
willing to enter on the path which leads to better things, simply enter upon it,