and deformed, them that are not willing so much as to look at her, them that,
when she burns with love towards them, hate her, what can be more insane than
this? For no one do the multitude hate so much, as those that want the glory they
have to bestow. Countless accusations at least do they frame against them, and
the result is the same, as if any one were to bring down a virgin daughter of the
king from the royal throne, and to require her to prostitute herself to gladiators,
who abhorred her. These then, as much as you pursue them, so much do they
turn away from you; but God, if you seek the glory that comes from Him, so
much the more both draws you unto Himself, and commends you, and great is
the reward He renders unto you.
But if you are minded in another way also to discern the mischief thereof,
when you give for display and ostentation, consider how great the sorrow that
then comes upon you, and how continual the desponding, while Christ's voice is
heard in your ears, saying, [Matthew 6:1] "You have lost all your reward." For in
every matter indeed vainglory is a bad thing, yet most of all in beneficence, for it
is the utmost cruelty, making a show of the calamities of others, and all but
upbraiding those in poverty. For if to mention one's own good actions is to
upbraid, what do you think it is to publish them even to many others.
How then shall we escape the danger? If we learn how to give alms, if we
see after whose good report we are to seek. For tell me, who has the skill of
almsgiving? Plainly, it is God, who has made known the thing, who best of all
knows it, and practises it without limit. What then? If you are learning to be a
wrestler, to whom do you look? Or to whom do you display your doings in the
wrestling school, to the seller of herbs, and of fish, or to the trainer? And yet
they are many, and he is one. What then, if while he admires you, others deride
you, will you not with him deride them?
What, if you are learning to box, will you not look in like manner to him
who knows how to teach this? And if you are practising oratory, will you not
accept the praise of the teacher of rhetoric, and despise the rest.
How then is it other than absurd, in other arts to look to the teacher only,

but here to do the contrary? Although the loss be not equal. For there, if you
wrestle according to the opinion of the multitude, and not that of the teacher, the
loss is in the wrestling; but here it is in eternal life. You have become like to God
in giving alms; be thou then like Him in not making a display. For even He said,
when healing, that they should tell no man.
But do you desire to be called merciful among men? And what is the gain?
The gain is nothing; but the loss infinite. For these very persons, whom you call
to be witnesses, become robbers of your treasures that are in the heavens; or
rather not these, but ourselves, who spoil our own possessions, and scatter what
we have laid up above.
O new calamity! This strange passion. Where moth corrupts not, nor thief
breaks through, vainglory scatters. This is the moth of those treasures there; this
the thief of our wealth in heaven; this steals away the riches that cannot be
spoiled; this mars and corrupts all. For because the devil saw that that place is
impregnable to thieves and to the worm, and the other plots against them, he by
vainglory steals away the wealth.
But do you desire glory? Does not then that suffice you which is given by
the receiver himself, that from our gracious God, but do you set your heart on
that from men also? Take heed, lest you undergo the contrary, lest some
condemn you as not showing mercy, but making a display, and seeking honor, as
making a show of the calamities of others.
For indeed the showing of mercy is a mystery. Shut therefore the doors, that
none may see what it is not pious to display. For our mysteries too are above all
things, a showing of God's mercy and loving-kindness. According to His great
mercy, He had mercy on us being disobedient.
And the first prayer too is full of mercy, when we entreat for the
energumens; and the second again, for others under penance seeking for much
mercy; and the third also for ourselves, and this puts forward the innocent
children of the people entreating God for mercy. For since we condemn
ourselves for sins, for them that have sinned much and deserve to be blamed we