not with the eyes of our body. And yet this is why we should rouse us the more
and be sober. For against an enemy whom one can perceive, one may easily be
on guard; but one that cannot be seen, if we be not continually in arms, we shall
not easily escape. And the more so, because he has no notion of open combat
(for he would surely be soon defeated), but often under the appearance of
friendship he insinuates the venom of his cruel malice. In this way it was that he
suborned Job's wife, by putting on the mask of natural affectionateness, to give
that wretchless advice. And so when conversing with Adam, he puts on the air of
one concerned and watching over his interests, and says, that "your eyes shall be
opened in the day that you eat of the tree." [Genesis 3:5] Thus Jephtha too he
persuaded, under the pretext of religion, to slay his daughter, and to offer the
sacrifice the Law forbade. Do you see what his wiles are, what his varying
warfare? Be then on your guard, and arm yourself at all points with the weapons
of the Spirit, get exactly acquainted with his plans, that you may both keep from
being caught, and easily catch him. For it was thus that Paul got the better of
him, by getting exactly acquainted with these. And so he says, "for we are not
ignorant of his devices." [2 Corinthians 2:11] Let us then also be earnest in
learning and avoiding his stratagems, that after obtaining a victory over him, we
may, whether in this present life or in that which is to come, be proclaimed
conquerors, and obtain those unalloyed blessings, by the grace and love toward
man, etc.

## Homily 11 on Romans

Rom. VI. 5
" For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we shall
be also in the likeness of His resurrection."
What I had before occasion to remark, that I mention here too, that he
continually digresses into exhortation, without making any twofold division as
he does in the other Epistles, and setting apart the former portion for doctrines,
and the latter for the care of moral instruction. Here then he does not do so, but
blends the latter with the subject throughout, so as to gain it an easy admission.
Here then he says there are two mortifyings, and two deaths, and that one is done
by Christ in Baptism, and the other it is our duty to effect by earnestness
afterwards. For that our former sins were buried, came of His gift. But the
remaining dead to sin after baptism must be the work of our own earnestness,
however much we find God here also giving us large help. For this is not the
only thing Baptism has the power to do, to obliterate our former transgressions;
for it also secures against subsequent ones. As then in the case of the former,
your contribution was faith that they might be obliterated, so also in those
subsequent to this, show forth the change in your aims, that you may not defile
yourself again. For it is this and the like that he is counselling you when he says,
"for if we have been planted together in the likeness of His Death, we shall be
also in the likeness of His Resurrection." Do you observe, how he rouses the
hearer by leading him straightway up to his Master, and taking great pains to
show the strong likeness? This is why he does not say "in death," lest you should
gainsay it, but, "in the likeness of His Death." For our essence itself has not died,
but the man of sins, that is, wickedness. And he does not say, "for if we have
been" partakers of "the likeness of His Death;" but what? "If we have been
planted together," so, by the mention of planting, giving a hint of the fruit