remain within him. But supposing Word to be said metaphorically of
God, we must still admit Word in its strict sense. For if a thing be
called a word metaphorically, this can only be by reason of some
manifestation; either it makes something manifest as a word, or it is
manifested by a word. If manifested by a word, there must exist a
word whereby it is manifested. If it is called a word because it
exteriorly manifests, what it exteriorly manifests cannot be called
word except in as far as it signifies the interior concept of the mind,
which anyone may also manifest by exterior signs. Therefore,
although Word may be sometimes said of God metaphorically,
nevertheless we must also admit Word in the proper sense, and
which is said personally.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing belonging to the intellect can be
applied to God personally, except word alone; for word alone
signifies that which emanates from another. For what the intellect
forms in its conception is the word. Now, the intellect itself,
according as it is made actual by the intelligible species, is
considered absolutely; likewise the act of understanding which is to
the actual intellect what existence is to actual being; since the act of
understanding does not signify an act going out from the intelligent
agent, but an act remaining in the agent. Therefore when we say that
word is knowledge, the term knowledge does not mean the act of a
knowing intellect, or any one of its habits, but stands for what the
intellect conceives by knowing. Hence also Augustine says (De Trin.
vii, 1) that the Word is "begotten wisdom;" for it is nothing but the
concept of the Wise One; and in the same way It can be called
"begotten knowledge." Thus can also be explained how "to speak" is
in God "to see by thought," forasmuch as the Word is conceived by
the gaze of the divine thought. Still the term "thought" does not
properly apply to the Word of God. For Augustine says (De Trin. xv,
16): "Therefore do we speak of the Word of God, and not of the
Thought of God, lest we believe that in God there is something
unstable, now assuming the form of Word, now putting off that form
and remaining latent and as it were formless." For thought consists
properly in the search after the truth, and this has no place in God.
But when the intellect attains to the form of truth, it does not think,
but perfectly contemplates the truth. Hence Anselm (Monol. lx) takes
"thought" in an improper sense for "contemplation."
Reply to Objection 3: As, properly speaking, Word in God is said
personally, and not essentially, so likewise is to "speak." Hence, as
the Word is not common to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, so it is

not true that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one speaker. So
Augustine says (De Trin. vii, 1): "He who speaks in that co-eternal
Word is understood as not alone in God, but as being with that very
Word, without which, forsooth, He would not be speaking." On the
other hand, "to be spoken" belongs to each Person, for not only is
the word spoken, but also the thing understood or signified by the
word. Therefore in this manner to one person alone in God does it
belong to be spoken in the same way as a word is spoken; whereas
in the way whereby a thing is spoken as being understood in the
word, it belongs to each Person to be spoken. For the Father, by
understanding Himself, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and all other
things comprised in this knowledge, conceives the Word; so that
thus the whole Trinity is "spoken" in the Word; and likewise also all
creatures: as the intellect of a man by the word he conceives in the
act of understanding a stone, speaks a stone. Anselm took the term
"speak" improperly for the act of understanding; whereas they really
differ from each other; for "to understand" means only the habitude
of the intelligent agent to the thing understood, in which habitude no
trace of origin is conveyed, but only a certain information of our
intellect; forasmuch as our intellect is made actual by the form of the
thing understood. In God, however, it means complete identity,
because in God the intellect and the thing understood are altogether
the same, as was proved above (Question 14, Articles 4,5). Whereas
to "speak" means chiefly the habitude to the word conceived; for "to
speak" is nothing but to utter a word. But by means of the word it
imports a habitude to the thing understood which in the word uttered
is manifested to the one who understands. Thus, only the Person
who utters the Word is "speaker" in God, although each Person
understands and is understood, and consequently is spoken by the
Word.
Reply to Objection 4: The term "word" is there taken figuratively, as
the thing signified or effected by word is called word. For thus
creatures are said to do the word of God, as executing any effect,
whereto they are ordained from the word conceived of the divine
wisdom; as anyone is said to do the word of the king when he does
the work to which he is appointed by the king's word.