expression is not, It appeared to me; but, I saw. There may, therefore, be
a question raised respecting that fire, how it was seen; whether within in
the spirit as it were outwardly, or really outwardly before the eyes of the
flesh. But of that dove, which is said to have descended in a bodily form,
no one ever doubted that it was seen by the eyes. Nor, again, as we call
the Son a Rock (for it is written, "And that Rock was Christ"), can we so
call the Spirits dove or fire. For that rock was a thing already created, and
after the mode of its action was called by the name of Christ, whom it
signified; like the stone placed under Jacob's head, and also anointed,
which he took in order to signify the Lord; or as Isaac was Christ, when
he carried the wood for the sacrifice of himself.2 A particular significative
action was added to those already existing things; they did not, as that
dove and fire, suddenly come into being in order simply so to signify. The
dove and the fire, indeed, seem to me more like that flame which
appeared to Moses in the bush, or that pillar which the people followed in
the wilderness,4 or the thunders and lightnings which came when the
Law was given in the mount. For the corporeal form of these things came
into being for the very purpose, that it might signify something, and then
pass away.

### CHAP. 7.—A DOUBT RAISED ABOUT DIVINE APPEARANCES.

12. The Holy Spirit, then, is also said to be sent, on account of these
corporeal forms which came into existence in time, in order to signify and
manifest Him, as He must needs be manifested, to human senses; yet He
is not said to be less than the Father, as the Son, because He was in the
form of a servant, is said to be; because that form of a servant inhered in
the unity of the person of the Son, but those corporeal forms appeared for
a time, in order to show what was necessary to be shown, and then ceased
to be. Why, then, is not the Father also said to be sent, through those
corporeal forms, the fire of the bush, and the pillar of cloud or of fire, and
the lightnings in the mount, and whatever other things of the kind
appeared at that time, when (as we have learned from Scripture
testimony) He spake face to face with the fathers, if He Himself was
manifested by those modes and forms of the creature, as exhibited and
presented corporeally to human sight? But if the Son was manifested by
them, why is He said to be sent so long after, when He was made of a

woman, as the apostle says, "But when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth His Son, made of a woman," seeing that He was sent also
before, when He appeared to the fathers by those changeable forms of the
creature? Or if He cannot rightly be said to be sent, unless when the
Word was made flesh, why is the Holy Spirit said to be sent, of whom no
such incarnation was ever wrought? But if by those visible things, which
are put before us in the Law and in the prophets, neither the Father nor
the Son but the Holy Spirit was manifested, why also is He said to be sent
now, when He was sent also before after these modes?
13. In the perplexity of this inquiry, the Lord helping us, we must ask,
first, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit; or whether,
sometimes the Father, sometimes the Son, sometimes the Holy Spirit; or
whether it was without any distinction of persons, in such way as the one
and only God is Spoken of, that is, that the Trinity itself appeared to the
Fathers by those forms of the creature. Next, whichever of these
alternatives shall have been found or thought true, whether for this
purpose only the creature was fashioned, wherein God, as He judged it
suitable at that time, should be shown to human sight; or whether angels,
who already existed, were so sent, as to speak in the person of God, taking
a corporeal form from the corporeal creature, for the purpose of their
ministry, as each had need; or else, according to the power the Creator
has given them, changing and converting their own body itself, to which
they are not subject, but govern it as subject to themselves, into whatever
appearances they would that were suited and apt to their several actions.
Lastly, we shall discern that which it was our purpose to ask, viz. whether
the Son and the Holy Spirit were also sent before; and, if they were so
sent, what difference there is between that sending, and the one which we
read of in the Gospel; or whether in truth neither of them were sent,
except when either the Son was made of the Virgin Mary, or the Holy
Spirit appeared in a visible form, whether in the dove or in tongues of
fire.