2 Corinthians 12:14
"Behold this is the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be a
burden to you; for I seek not yours, but you: for the children ought not to lay up
for the parents, but the parents for the children."
What he says is this; 'It is not because I do not receive of you that I do not
come to you; nay, I have already come twice; and I am prepared to come this
third time, "and I will not be a burden to you."' And the reason is a noble one.
For he did not say, 'because you are mean,' 'because you are hurt at it,' 'because,
you are weak:' but what? "For I seek not yours, but you." 'I seek greater things;
souls instead of goods; instead of gold, salvation.' Then because there still hung
about the matter some suspicion, as if he were displeased at them; he therefore
even states an argument. For since it was likely they would say, 'Can you not
have both us and ours?' he adds with much grace this excuse for them, saying,
"For the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the
children;" instead of teachers and disciples, employing the term parents and
children, and showing that he does as a matter of duty what was not of duty. For
Christ did not so command, but he says this to spare them; and therefore he adds
also something further. For he did not only say that "the children ought not to lay
up," but also that the parents ought to. Therefore since it is meet to give,

2 Corinthians 12:15
"I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls."
'For the law of nature indeed has commanded the parents to lay up for the
children; but I do not do this only, but I give myself also besides.' And this
lavishness of his, the not only not receiving, but giving also besides, is not in
common sort but accompanied with great liberality, and out of his own want; for
the words, "I will be spent," are of one who would imply this. 'For should it be
necessary to spend my very flesh, I will not spare it for your salvation.' And that
which follows contains at once accusation and love, "though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I be loved." 'And I do this,' he says, 'for the sake
of those who are beloved by me, yet love me not equally.' Observe then, now,
how many steps there are in this matter. He had a right to receive, but he did not
receive; here is good work the first: and this, though in want; [good work] the
second; and though preaching to them, the third; he gives besides, the fourth;
and not merely gives, but lavishly too, the fifth; not money only, but himself, the
sixth; for those who loved him not greatly, the seventh; and for those whom he
greatly loved, the eighth.
3. Let us then also emulate this man! For it is a serious charge, the not
loving even; but becomes more serious, when although one is loved he loves not.
For if he that loves one that loves him be no better than the publicans; [Matthew
5:46] he that does not so much as this ranks with the beasts; yea rather, is even
below them. What do you say, O man? Lovest thou not him that loves you?
What then do you live for? Wherein will you be of use hereafter ? In what sort of
matters? In public? In private? By no means; for nothing is more useless than a
man that knows not to love. This law even robbers have oftentimes respected,
and murderers, and housebreakers; and having only taken salt with one, have
been made his friends , letting the board change their disposition, and thou that