On the contrary, It is written (Wis. 9:16): "The things that are in
heaven, who shall search out?" But these substances are said to be
in heaven, according to Mt. 18:10, "Their angels in heaven," etc.
Therefore immaterial substances cannot be known by human
investigation.
I answer that, In the opinion of Plato, immaterial substances are not
only understood by us, but are the objects we understand first of all.
For Plato taught that immaterial subsisting forms, which he called
"Ideas," are the proper objects of our intellect, and thus first and
"per se" understood by us; and, further, that material objects are
known by the soul inasmuch as phantasy and sense are mixed up
with the mind. Hence the purer the intellect is, so much the more
clearly does it perceive the intelligible truth of immaterial things.
But in Aristotle's opinion, which experience corroborates, our
intellect in its present state of life has a natural relationship to the
natures of material things; and therefore it can only understand by
turning to the phantasms, as we have said above (Question 84,
Article 7). Thus it clearly appears that immaterial substances which
do not fall under sense and imagination, cannot first and "per se" be
known by us, according to the mode of knowledge which experience
proves us to have.
Nevertheless Averroes (Comment. De Anima iii) teaches that in this
present life man can in the end arrive at the knowledge of separate
substances by being coupled or united to some separate substance,
which he calls the "active intellect," and which, being a separate
substance itself, can naturally understand separate substances.
Hence, when it is perfectly united to us so that by its means we are
able to understand perfectly, we also shall be able to understand
separate substances, as in the present life through the medium of
the passive intellect united to us, we can understand material things.
Now he said that the active intellect is united to us, thus. For since
we understand by means of both the active intellect and intelligible
objects, as, for instance, we understand conclusions by principles
understood; it is clear that the active intellect must be compared to
the objects understood, either as the principal agent is to the
instrument, or as form to matter. For an action is ascribed to two
principles in one of these two ways; to a principal agent and to an
instrument, as cutting to the workman and the saw; to a form and its
subject, as heating to heat and fire. In both these ways the active

intellect can be compared to the intelligible object as perfection is to
the perfectible, and as act is to potentiality. Now a subject is made
perfect and receives its perfection at one and the same time, as the
reception of what is actually visible synchronizes with the reception
of light in the eye. Therefore the passive intellect receives the
intelligible object and the active intellect together; and the more
numerous the intelligible objects received, so much the nearer do we
come to the point of perfect union between ourselves and the active
intellect; so much so that when we understand all the intelligible
objects, the active intellect becomes one with us, and by its
instrumentality we can understand all things material and immaterial.
In this he makes the ultimate happiness of man to consist. Nor, as
regards the present inquiry, does it matter whether the passive
intellect in that state of happiness understands separate substances
by the instrumentality of the active intellect, as he himself maintains,
or whether (as he says Alexander holds) the passive intellect can
never understand separate substances (because according to him it
is corruptible), but man understands separate substances by means
of the active intellect.
This opinion, however, is untrue. First, because, supposing the
active intellect to be a separate substance, we could not formally
understand by its instrumentality, for the medium of an agent's
formal action consists in its form and act, since every agent acts
according to its actuality, as was said of the passive intellect
(Question 70, Article 1). Secondly, this opinion is untrue, because in
the above explanation, the active intellect, supposing it to be a
separate substance, would not be joined to us in its substance, but
only in its light, as participated in things understood; and would not
extend to the other acts of the active intellect so as to enable us to
understand immaterial substances; just as when we see colors set
off by the sun, we are not united to the substance of the sun so as to
act like the sun, but its light only is united to us, that we may see the
colors. Thirdly, this opinion is untrue, because granted that, as
above explained, the active intellect were united to us in substance,
still it is not said that it is wholly so united in regard to one
intelligible object, or two; but rather in regard to all intelligible
objects. But all such objects together do not equal the force of the
active intellect, as it is a much greater thing to understand separate
substances than to understand all material things. Hence it clearly
follows that the knowledge of all material things would not make the
active intellect to be so united to us as to enable us by its
instrumentality to understand separate substances.