he said not "made" [Him] a sinner, but "sin;" not, 'Him that had not sinned' only,
but "that had not even known sin; that we" also "might become," he did not say
'righteous,' but, "righteousness," and, "the righteousness of God." For this is [the
righteousness] "of God" when we are justified not by works, (in which case it
were necessary that not a spot even should be found,) but by grace, in which
case all sin is done away. And this at the same time that it suffers us not to be
lifted up, (seeing the whole is the free gift of God,) teaches us also the greatness
of that which is given. For that which was before was a righteousness of the Law
and of works, but this is "the righteousness of God."
6. Reflecting then on these things, let us fear these words more than hell; let
us reverence the things [they express] more than the kingdom, and let us not
deem it grievous to be punished, but to sin. For were He not to punish us, we
ought to take vengeance on ourselves, who have been so ungrateful towards our
Benefactor. Now he that has an object of affection, has often even slain himself,
when unsuccessful in his love; and though successful, if he has been guilty of a
fault towards her, counts it not fit that he should even live; and shall not we,
when we outrage One so loving and gentle, cast ourselves into the fire of hell?
Shall I say something strange, and marvellous, and to many perhaps incredible?
To one who has understanding and loves the Lord as it behooves to love Him,
there will be greater comfort if punished after provoking One so loving, than if
not punished. And this one may see by the common practice. For he that has
wronged his dearest friend feels then the greatest relief, when he has wreaked
vengeance on himself and suffered evil. And accordingly David said, "I the
shepherd have sinned, and I the shepherd have done amiss; and these the flock,
what have they done? Let Your hand be upon me, and upon my father's house."
[2 Samuel 24:17. Septuagint] And when he lost Absalom he wreaked the
extremest vengeance upon himself, although he was not the injurer but the
injured; but nevertheless, because he loved the departed exceedingly, he racked
himself with anguish, in this manner comforting himself. Let us therefore also,
when we sin against Him Whom we ought not to sin against, take vengeance on

ourselves. See you not those who have lost true-born children, that they therefore
both beat themselves and tear their hair, because to punish themselves for the
sake of those they loved carries comfort with it. But if, when we have caused no
harm to those dearest to us, to suffer because of what has befallen them brings
consolation; when we ourselves are the persons who have given provocation and
wrong, will it not much rather be a relief to us to suffer the penalty and will not
the being unpunished punish? Every one in a manner will see this. If any love
Christ as it behooves to love Him, he knows what I say; how, even when He
forgives, he will not endure to go unpunished; for you undergo the severest
punishment in having provoked Him. And I know indeed that I am speaking
what will not be believed by the many; but nevertheless it is so as I have said. If
then we love Christ as it behooves to love Him, we shall punish ourselves when
we sin. For to those who love any whomsover, not the suffering somewhat
because they have provoked the beloved one is unpleasing; but above all, that
they have provoked the person loved. And if this last when angered does not
punish, he has tortured his lover more; but if he exacts satisfaction, he has
comforted him rather. Let us therefore not fear hell, but offending God; for it is
more grievous than that when He turns away in wrath: this is worse than all, this
heavier than all. And that you may learn what a thing it is, consider this which I
say. If one that was himself a king, beholding a robber and malefactor under
punishment, gave his well-beloved son, his only-begotten and true, to be slain;
and transferred the death and the guilt as well, from him to his son, (who was
himself of no such character,) that he might both save the condemned man and
clear him from his evil reputation ; and then if, having subsequently promoted
him to great dignity, he had yet, after thus saving him and advancing him to that
glory unspeakable, been outraged by the person that had received such
treatment: would not that man, if he had any sense, have chosen ten thousand
deaths rather than appear guilty of so great ingratitude? This then let us also now
consider with ourselves, and groan bitterly for the provocations we have offered
our Benefactor; nor let us therefore presume, because though outraged He bears