have contributed nothing. For what? I ask, was not Paul himself, the wonderful,
he that was so versed in the law, he that was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel
according to the most perfect manner, was not he saved by grace? With good
reason too does he call this a mystery, for a mystery it is, to raise the Gentiles in
a moment to a higher rank than the Jews. "As I wrote afore," says he, "in few
words," i.e., briefly,
Ver. 4. "Whereby, when you read, you can perceive."
Amazing! So then he wrote not the whole, nor so much as he should have
written. But here the nature of the subject prevented it. Elsewhere, as in the case
of the Hebrews [Hebrews 5:11] and the Corinthians, [1 Corinthians 3:2] the
incapacity of the hearers. "Whereby, when you read, you can perceive," says he,
"my understanding in the mystery of Christ," i.e., how I knew, how I understood
either such things as God has spoken, or else, that Christ sits at the right hand of
God; and then too the dignity, in that God "has not dealt so with any nation."
[Psalm 147:20] And then to explain what nation this is with whom God has thus
dealt, he adds,
Ver. 5. "Which in other generations was not made known unto the sons of
men, as it has now been revealed unto His holy Apostles and Prophets in the
Spirit."
What then, tell me, did not the Prophets know it? How then does Christ say,
that Moses and the Prophets wrote "these things concerning Me?" And again, "If
you believed Moses, you would believe Me." [John 5:46] And again, "You search
the Scriptures, because ye think that in them you have eternal life, and these are
they which bear witness of me." [John 5:39] His meaning is this, either that it
was not revealed unto all men, for he adds, "which in other generations was not
made known unto the sons of men, as it has now been revealed;" or else, that it
was not thus made known by the very facts and realities themselves, "as it has
now been revealed unto His holy Apostles and Prophets in the Spirit." For
reflect. Peter, had he not been instructed by the Spirit, never would have gone to
the Gentiles. For hear what he says, "Then has God given unto them the Holy

Ghost, as well as unto us." [Acts 10:47] That it was by the Spirit that God chose
that they should receive the grace. The Prophets then spoke, yet they knew it not
thus perfectly; so far from it, that not even did the Apostles, after they had heard
it. So far did it surpass all human calculation, and the common expectation.
Ver. 6. "That the Gentiles are fellow-heirs, and fellow-members of the body
and fellow partakers."
What is this; "fellow-heirs, and fellow-partakers of the promise, and fellowmembers of the body?" This last is the great thing, that they should be one body;
this exceeding closeness of relation to Him. For that they were to be called
indeed, that they knew, but that it was so great, as yet they knew not. This
therefore he calls the mystery. "Of the promise." The Israelites were partakers,
and the Gentiles also were fellow-partakers of the promise of God.
"In Christ Jesus through the Gospel."
That is, by His being sent unto them also, and by their believing; for it is
not said they are fellow-heirs simply, but "through the Gospel." However, this
indeed, is nothing so great, it is in fact a small thing, and it discloses to us
another and greater thing, that not only men knew not this, but that neither
Angels nor Archangels, nor any other created power, knew it. For it was a
mystery, and was not revealed. "That ye can perceive," he says, "my
understanding." This alludes, perhaps, to what he said to them in the Acts, that
he had some knowledge that the Gentiles also were called. This, he says, is his
own knowledge, "the knowledge of the mystery," which he had mentioned, viz.,
"that Christ will in Himself make of the two one new man." For by revelation he
was instructed, both he and Peter, that they must not spurn the Gentiles; and this
he states in his defence.
Ver. 7. "Whereof I was made a minister, according to the gift of that grace
of God which was given me according to the working of His power."
He had said, "I am a prisoner;" but now again he says, that all is of God, as
he says, "according to the gift of His grace;" for according to the power of the
gift is the dignity of this privilege. But the gift would not have been enough, had