Letter 2
1. If it were possible to express tears and groans by means of writing I
would have filled the letter, which I now send to you, with them. Now I weep
not because you are anxious concerning your patrimony, but because you have
blotted out your name from the list of the brethren, because you have trampled
upon the covenant which you had made with Christ. This is the reason why I
shudder, this is the cause of my distress. On this account do I fear and tremble,
knowing that the rejection of this covenant will bring great condemnation upon
those who have enlisted for this noble warfare, and owing to indolence have
deserted their proper rank. And that the punishment for such is heavier than for
others is manifest for this reason. For no one would indite a private individual
for shunning military service; but when once a man has become a soldier, if he
be caught deserting the ranks, he runs a risk of suffering the most extreme
penalty. There is nothing strange, beloved Theodore, in a wrestler falling, but in
his remaining in a fallen condition; neither is it a grievous thing for the warrior
to be wounded, but to despair after the blow has been struck, and to neglect the
wound. No merchant, having once suffered shipwreck, and lost his freight,
desists from sailing, but again crosses the sea and the billows, and the broad
ocean, and recovers his former wealth. We see athletes also who after many falls
have gained the wreath of victory; and often, before now, a soldier who has once
ran away has turned out a champion, and prevailed over the enemy. Many also of
those who have denied Christ owing to the pressure of torture, have fought
again, and departed at last with the crown of martyrdom upon their brows. But if
each of these had despaired after the first blow, he would not have reaped the
subsequent benefits. Even so now, beloved Theodore, because the enemy has
shaken you a little from your position, do not thou give yourself an additional
thrust into the pit, but stand up bravely, and return speedily to the place from

which you have departed, and deem not this blow, lasting but for a little while,
any reproach. For if you saw a soldier returning wounded from war you would
not reproach him; for it is a reproach to cast away one's arms, and to hold aloof
from the enemy; but as long as a man stands fighting, even if he be wounded and
retreat for a short time, no one is so unfeeling or inexperienced in matters of war,
as to find any fault with him. Exemption from wounds is the lot of noncombatants; but those who advance with much spirit against the enemy may
sometimes be wounded and fail; which is exactly what has now occurred in your
case; for suddenly, while you attempted to destroy the serpent you were bitten.
But take courage, you need a little vigilance, and then not a trace of this wound
will be left; or rather by the grace of God you will crush the head of the Evil One
himself; nor let it trouble you that you are soon impeded, even at the outset. For
the eye, the keen eye of the Evil One perceived the excellence of your soul, and
guessed from many tokens that a brave adversary would wax strong against him;
for he expected that one who had promptly attacked him with such great
vehemence would easily overcome him, if he persevered. Therefore he was
diligent, and watchful, and mightily stirred up against you, or rather against his
own head, if you will bravely stand your ground. For who did not marvel at your
quick, sincere, and fervent change to good? For delicacy of food was
disregarded, and costliness of raiment was despised, all manner of parade was
put down, and all the zeal for the wisdom of this world was suddenly transferred
to the divine oracles; whole days were spent in reading, and whole nights in
prayer; no mention was made of your family dignity, nor any thought taken of
your wealth; but to clasp the knees and hasten to the feet of the brethren you
recognized as something nobler than high birth. These things irritated the Evil
One, these things stirred him up to more vehement strife; but yet he did not give
a deadly blow. For if after a long time, and continual fastings, and sleeping on
the bare ground and the rest of the discipline he overthrew you, even then there
was no need to despair; nevertheless one would have said that the damage was
great if defeat had taken place after many toils, and labour, and victories; but