about for seven days." For assuredly the sound of trumpets is not able to throw
down stones, though one blow for ten thousand years; but Faith can do all things.
Do you see that in all cases it is not by natural sequence, nor yet by any law
of nature that it was changed, but all is done contrary to expectation?
Accordingly in this case also all is done contrary to expectation. For inasmuch as
he had said again and again, that we ought to trust to the future hopes, he
introduced all this argument with reason, showing that not now [only], but even
from the beginning all the miracles have been accomplished and achieved by
means of it.
"By faith, the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, having
received the spies with peace." It would then be disgraceful, if you should appear
more faithless even than a harlot. Yet she [merely] heard what the men related,
and immediately believed. Whereupon the end also followed; for when all
perished, she alone was preserved. She did not say to herself, I shall be with my
many friends. She did not say, Can I possibly be wiser than these judicious men
who do not believe—and shall I believe? She said no such thing, but believed
what had taken place, which it was likely that they would suffer.

Hebrews 11:32
4. [Hebrews 11:32] "And what shall I more say? For the time would fail me
to tell." After this he no longer puts down the names: but having ended with an
harlot, and put them to shame by the quality of the person, he no longer enlarges
on the histories, lest he should be thought tedious. However he does not set them
aside, but runs over them, [doing] both very judiciously, avoiding satiety, and not
spoiling the closeness of arrangement; he was neither altogether silent, nor did
he speak so as to annoy; for he effects both points. For when a man is contending
vehemently [in argument], if he persist in contending, he wearies out the hearer,
annoying him when he is already persuaded, and gaining the reputation of vain
ambitiousness. For he ought to accommodate himself to what is expedient.
"And what do I more say" (he says)? "For the time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthah, of David also and
Samuel, and of the prophets."
Some find fault with Paul, because he puts Barak, and Samson, and
Jephthah in these places. What do you say? After having introduced the harlot,
shall he not introduce these? For do not tell me of the rest of their life, but only
whether they did not believe and shine in Faith.

Hebrews 11:33
"And the prophets," he says, [Hebrews 11:33] "who through faith subdued
kingdoms." You see that he does not here testify to their life as being illustrious;
for this was not the point in question: but the enquiry thus far was about their
faith. For tell me whether they did not accomplish all by faith?
"By faith," he says, "they subdued kingdoms;" those with Gideon. "Wrought
righteousness;" who? The same. Plainly he means here, kindness.
I think it is of David that he says "they obtained promises." But of what sort
were these? Those in which He said that his "seed should sit upon" his "throne."
[Psalm 132:12]