THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.4.

Now there are some who endeavor to assign the cause of this power
to the nature of the fifth essence. This, as they say, is light, which
they make out to be of the composition of the human body, and by
which they contend that contrary elements are reconciled; so that in
the state of this mortality, elemental nature is predominant in human
bodies: so that, according to the nature of this predominating
element the human body is borne downwards by its own power: but
in the condition of glory the heavenly nature will predominate, by
whose tendency and power Christ's body and the bodies of the
saints are lifted up to heaven. But we have already treated of this
opinion in the FP, Question 76, Article 7, and shall deal with it more
fully in treating of the general resurrection (XP, Question 84, Article
1).
Setting this opinion aside, others assign as the cause of this power
the glorified soul itself, from whose overflow the body will be
glorified, as Augustine writes to Dioscorus (Ep. cxviii). For the
glorified body will be so submissive to the glorified soul, that, as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxii), "wheresoever the spirit listeth,
thither the body will be on the instant; nor will the spirit desire
anything unbecoming to the soul or the body." Now it is befitting the
glorified and immortal body for it to be in a heavenly place, as stated
above (Article 1). Consequently, Christ's body ascended into heaven
by the power of His soul willing it. But as the body is made glorious
by participation with the soul, even so, as Augustine says (Tract.
xxiii in Joan.), "the soul is beatified by participating in God."
Consequently, the Divine power is the first source of the ascent into
heaven. Therefore Christ ascended into heaven by His own power,
first of all by His Divine power, and secondly by the power of His
glorified soul moving His body at will.
Reply to Objection 1: As Christ is said to have risen by His own
power, though He was raised to life by the power of the Father, since
the Father's power is the same as the Son's; so also Christ ascended
into heaven by His own power, and yet was raised up and taken up
to heaven by the Father.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument proves that Christ did not
ascend into heaven by His own power, i.e. that which is natural to
human nature: yet He did ascend by His own power, i.e. His Divine
power, as well as by His own power, i.e. the power of His beatified
soul. And although to mount upwards is contrary to the nature of a
human body in its present condition, in which the body is not

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.4.

entirely dominated by the soul, still it will not be unnatural or forced
in a glorified body, whose entire nature is utterly under the control of
the spirit.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the Divine power be infinite, and
operate infinitely, so far as the worker is concerned, still the effect
thereof is received in things according to their capacity, and as God
disposes. Now a body is incapable of being moved locally in an
instant, because it must be commensurate with space, according to
the division of which time is reckoned, as is proved in Physics vi.
Consequently, it is not necessary for a body moved by God to be
moved instantaneously, but with such speed as God disposes.