THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.2.

of a creature with God transcends it. Hence it follows that a thing is
said to be assumable according to some fitness for such a union.
Now this fitness in human nature may be taken from two things, viz.
according to its dignity, and according to its need. According to its
dignity, because human nature, as being rational and intellectual,
was made for attaining to the Word to some extent by its operation,
viz. by knowing and loving Him. According to its need---because it
stood in need of restoration, having fallen under original sin. Now
these two things belong to human nature alone. For in the irrational
creature the fitness of dignity is wanting, and in the angelic nature
the aforesaid fitness of need is wanting. Hence it follows that only
human nature was assumable.
Reply to Objection 1: Creatures are said to be "such" with reference
to their proper causes, not with reference to what belongs to them
from their first and universal causes; thus we call a disease
incurable, not that it cannot be cured by God, but that it cannot be
cured by the proper principles of the subject. Therefore a creature is
said to be not assumable, not as if we withdrew anything from the
power of God, but in order to show the condition of the creature,
which has no capability for this.
Reply to Objection 2: The likeness of image is found in human
nature, forasmuch as it is capable of God, viz. by attaining to Him
through its own operation of knowledge and love. But the likeness of
trace regards only a representation by Divine impression, existing in
the creature, and does not imply that the irrational creature, in which
such a likeness is, can attain to God by its own operation alone. For
what does not come up to the less, has no fitness for the greater; as
a body which is not fitted to be perfected by a sensitive soul is much
less fitted for an intellectual soul. Now much greater and more
perfect is the union with God in personal being than the union by
operation. And hence the irrational creature which falls short of the
union with God by operation has no fitness to be united with Him in
personal being.
Reply to Objection 3: Some say that angels are not assumable, since
they are perfect in their personality from the beginning of their
creation, inasmuch as they are not subject to generation and
corruption; hence they cannot be assumed to the unity of a Divine
Person, unless their personality be destroyed, and this does not befit
the incorruptibility of their nature nor the goodness of the one
assuming, to Whom it does not belong to corrupt any perfection in

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.2.

the creature assumed. But this would not seem totally to disprove
the fitness of the angelic nature for being assumed. For God by
producing a new angelic nature could join it to Himself in unity of
Person, and in this way nothing pre-existing would be corrupted in it.
But as was said above, there is wanting the fitness of need, because,
although the angelic nature in some is the subject of sin, their sin is
irremediable, as stated above (FP, Question 64, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 4: The perfection of the universe is not the
perfection of one person or suppositum, but of something which is
one by position or order, whereof very many parts are not capable of
assumption, as was said above. Hence it follows that only human
nature is capable of being assumed.