Reply to Objection 4: The form signified by the word "person" is not
essence or nature, but personality. So, as there are three
personalities---that is, three personal properties in the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost---it is predicated of the three, not in the singular, but
in the plural.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the concrete essential names can stand

for the person?
Objection 1: It would seem that the concrete, essential names cannot
stand for the person, so that we can truly say "God begot God." For,
as the logicians say, "a singular term signifies what it stands for."
But this name "God" seems to be a singular term, for it cannot be
predicated in the plural, as above explained (Article 3). Therefore,
since it signifies the essence, it stands for essence, and not for
person.
Objection 2: Further, a term in the subject is not modified by a term
in the predicate, as to its signification; but only as to the sense
signified in the predicate. But when I say, "God creates," this name
"God" stands for the essence. So when we say "God begot," this
term "God" cannot by reason of the notional predicate, stand for
person.
Objection 3: Further, if this be true, "God begot," because the Father
generates; for the same reason this is true, "God does not beget,"
because the Son does not beget. Therefore there is God who begets,
and there is God who does not beget; and thus it follows that there
are two Gods.
Objection 4: Further, if "God begot God," He begot either God, that is
Himself, or another God. But He did not beget God, that is Himself;
for, as Augustine says (De Trin. i, 1), "nothing begets itself." Neither
did He beget another God; as there is only one God. Therefore it is
false to say, "God begot God."
Objection 5: Further, if "God begot God," He begot either God who is
the Father, or God who is not the Father. If God who is the Father,
then God the Father was begotten. If God who is not the Father, then
there is a God who is not God the Father: which is false. Therefore it
cannot be said that "God begot God."
On the contrary, In the Creed it is said, "God of God."
I answer that, Some have said that this name "God" and the like,
properly according to their nature, stand for the essence, but by
reason of some notional adjunct are made to stand for the Person.

This opinion apparently arose from considering the divine simplicity,
which requires that in God, He "who possesses" and "what is
possessed" be the same. So He who possesses Godhead, which is
signified by the name God, is the same as Godhead. But when we
consider the proper way of expressing ourselves, the mode of
signification must be considered no less than the thing signified.
Hence as this word "God" signifies the divine essence as in Him
Who possesses it, just as the name "man" signifies humanity in a
subject, others more truly have said that this word "God," from its
mode of signification, can, in its proper sense, stand for person, as
does the word "man." So this word "God" sometimes stands for the
essence, as when we say "God creates"; because this predicate is
attributed to the subject by reason of the form signified---that is,
Godhead. But sometimes it stands for the person, either for only
one, as when we say, "God begets," or for two, as when we say,
"God spirates"; or for three, as when it is said: "To the King of ages,
immortal, invisible, the only God," etc. (1 Tim. 1:17).
Reply to Objection 1: Although this name "God" agrees with singular
terms as regards the form signified not being multiplied;
nevertheless it agrees also with general terms so far as the form
signified is to be found in several "supposita." So it need not always
stand for the essence it signifies.
Reply to Objection 2: This holds good against those who say that the
word "God" does not naturally stand for person.
Reply to Objection 3: The word "God" stands for the person in a
different way from that in which this word "man" does; for since the
form signified by this word "man"---that is, humanity---is really
divided among its different subjects, it stands of itself for the person,
even if there is no adjunct determining it to the person---that is, to a
distinct subject. The unity or community of the human nature,
however, is not a reality, but is only in the consideration of the mind.
Hence this term "man" does not stand for the common nature,
unless this is required by some adjunct, as when we say, "man is a
species"; whereas the form signified by the name "God"---that is, the
divine essence---is really one and common. So of itself it stands for
the common nature, but by some adjunct it may be restricted so as
to stand for the person. So, when we say, "God generates," by
reason of the notional act this name "God" stands for the person of
the Father. But when we say, "God does not generate," there is no
adjunct to determine this name to the person of the Son, and hence