THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.10.

bread, without partaking of the Eucharist afterwards."
Reply to Objection 3: The wording of this decree is in accordance
with the former custom observed by some of receiving the body of
Christ on that day after breaking their fast, so as to represent the
Lord's supper. But this is now abrogated, because as Augustine
says (Resp. ad Januar., Ep. liv), it is customary throughout the whole
world for Christ's body to be received before breaking the fast.
Reply to Objection 4: As stated in the SS, Question 147, Article 6, ad
2, there are two kinds of fast. First, there is the natural fast, which
implies privation of everything taken before-hand by way of food or
drink: and such fast is required for this sacrament for the reasons
given above. And therefore it is never lawful to take this sacrament
after taking water, or other food or drink, or even medicine, no matter
how small the quantity be. Nor does it matter whether it nourishes or
not, whether it be taken by itself or with other things, provided it be
taken by way of food or drink. But the remains of food left in the
mouth, if swallowed accidentally, do not hinder receiving this
sacrament, because they are swallowed not by way of food but by
way of saliva. The same holds good of the unavoidable remains of
the water or wine wherewith the mouth is rinsed, provided they be
not swallowed in great quantity, but mixed with saliva.
Secondly, there is the fast of the Church, instituted for afflicting the
body: and this fast is not hindered by the things mentioned (in the
objection), because they do not give much nourishment, but are
taken rather as an alterative.
Reply to Objection 5: That this sacrament ought to enter into the
mouth of a Christian before any other food must not be understood
absolutely of all time, otherwise he who had once eaten or drunk
could never afterwards take this sacrament: but it must be
understood of the same day; and although the beginning of the day
varies according to different systems of reckoning (for some begin
their day at noon, some at sunset, others at midnight, and others at
sunrise), the Roman Church begins it at midnight. Consequently, if
any person takes anything by way of food or drink after midnight, he
may not receive this sacrament on that day; but he can do so if the
food was taken before midnight. Nor does it matter, so far as the
precept is concerned, whether he has slept after taking food or drink,
or whether he has digested it; but it does matter as to the mental
disturbance which one suffers from want of sleep or from

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.10.

indigestion, for, if the mind be much disturbed, one becomes unfit
for receiving this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 6: The greatest devotion is called for at the
moment of receiving this sacrament, because it is then that the effect
of the sacrament is bestowed, and such devotion is hindered more
by what goes before it than by what comes after it. And therefore it
was ordained that men should fast before receiving the sacrament
rather than after. Nevertheless there ought to be some interval
between receiving this sacrament and taking other food.
Consequently, both the Postcommunion prayer of thanksgiving is
said in the Mass, and the communicants say their own private
prayers.
However, according to the ancient Canons, the following ordination
was made by Pope Clement I, (Ep. ii), "If the Lord's portion be eaten
in the morning, the ministers who have taken it shall fast until the
sixth hour, and if they take it at the third or fourth hour, they shall
fast until evening." For in olden times, the priest celebrated Mass
less frequently, and with greater preparation: but now, because the
sacred mysteries have to be celebrated oftener, the same could not
be easily observed, and so it has been abrogated by contrary
custom.