same in like manner applies to other names; and this was taught by
Rabbi Moses. Others say that these names applied to God signify
His relationship towards creatures: thus in the words, "God is good,"
we mean, God is the cause of goodness in things; and the same rule
applies to other names.
Both of these opinions, however, seem to be untrue for three
reasons. First because in neither of them can a reason be assigned
why some names more than others are applied to God. For He is
assuredly the cause of bodies in the same way as He is the cause of
good things; therefore if the words "God is good," signified no more
than, "God is the cause of good things," it might in like manner be
said that God is a body, inasmuch as He is the cause of bodies. So
also to say that He is a body implies that He is not a mere
potentiality, as is primary matter. Secondly, because it would follow
that all names applied to God would be said of Him by way of being
taken in a secondary sense, as healthy is secondarily said of
medicine, forasmuch as it signifies only the cause of the health in
the animal which primarily is called healthy. Thirdly, because this is
against the intention of those who speak of God. For in saying that
God lives, they assuredly mean more than to say the He is the cause
of our life, or that He differs from inanimate bodies.
Therefore we must hold a different doctrine---viz. that these names
signify the divine substance, and are predicated substantially of
God, although they fall short of a full representation of Him. Which is
proved thus. For these names express God, so far as our intellects
know Him. Now since our intellect knows God from creatures, it
knows Him as far as creatures represent Him. Now it is shown above
(Question 4, Article 2) that God prepossesses in Himself all the
perfections of creatures, being Himself simply and universally
perfect. Hence every creature represents Him, and is like Him so far
as it possesses some perfection; yet it represents Him not as
something of the same species or genus, but as the excelling
principle of whose form the effects fall short, although they derive
some kind of likeness thereto, even as the forms of inferior bodies
represent the power of the sun. This was explained above (Question
4, Article 3), in treating of the divine perfection. Therefore the
aforesaid names signify the divine substance, but in an imperfect
manner, even as creatures represent it imperfectly. So when we say,
"God is good," the meaning is not, "God is the cause of goodness,"
or "God is not evil"; but the meaning is, "Whatever good we attribute
to creatures, pre-exists in God," and in a more excellent and higher

way. Hence it does not follow that God is good, because He causes
goodness; but rather, on the contrary, He causes goodness in things
because He is good; according to what Augustine says (De Doctr.
Christ. i, 32), "Because He is good, we are."
Reply to Objection 1: Damascene says that these names do not
signify what God is, forasmuch as by none of these names is
perfectly expressed what He is; but each one signifies Him in an
imperfect manner, even as creatures represent Him imperfectly.
Reply to Objection 2: In the significance of names, that from which
the name is derived is different sometimes from what it is intended
to signify, as for instance, this name "stone" [lapis] is imposed from
the fact that it hurts the foot [loedit pedem], but it is not imposed to
signify that which hurts the foot, but rather to signify a certain kind
of body; otherwise everything that hurts the foot would be a stone.
So we must say that these kinds of divine names are imposed from
the divine processions; for as according to the diverse processions
of their perfections, creatures are the representations of God,
although in an imperfect manner; so likewise our intellect knows and
names God according to each kind of procession; but nevertheless
these names are not imposed to signify the procession themselves,
as if when we say "God lives," the sense were, "life proceeds from
Him"; but to signify the principle itself of things, in so far as life preexists in Him, although it pre-exists in Him in a more eminent way
than can be understood or signified.
Reply to Objection 3: We cannot know the essence of God in this life,
as He really is in Himself; but we know Him accordingly as He is
represented in the perfections of creatures; and thus the names
imposed by us signify Him in that manner only.