John 16:32
"The Father is with Me."
He has again put on their account; for this they everywhere wished to learn.
Then, to show that He did not give them perfect knowledge by saying this, but in
order that their reason might not rebel, (for it was probable that they might form
some human ideas, and think that they should not enjoy any assistance from
Him,) He says,

John 16:33
"These things I have spoken unto you, that in Me ye might have peace."
That is, "that you should not cast Me from your thoughts, but receive Me."
Let no one, then, drag these words into a doctrine; they are spoken for our
comfort and love. "For not even when we suffer such things as I have mentioned
shall your troubles stop there, but as long as you are in the world you shall have
sorrow, not only now when I am betrayed, but also afterwards. But rouse your
minds, for you shall suffer nothing terrible. When the master has gotten the
better of his enemies, the disciples must not despond." "And how," tell me, "have
You 'conquered the world'?" I have told you already, that I have cast down its
ruler, but you shall know hereafter, when all things yield and give place to you.
3. But it is permitted to us also to conquer, looking to the Author of our
faith, and walking on that road which He cut for us. So neither shall death get the
mastery of us. "What then, shall we not die?" says some one. Why, from this
very thing it is clear that he shall not gain the mastery over us. The champion
truly will then be glorious, not when he has not closed with his opponent, but
when having closed he is not holden by him. We therefore are not mortal,
because of our struggle with death, but immortal, because of our victory; then
should we have been mortal, had we remained with him always. As then I should
not call the longest-lived animals immortal, although they long remain free from
death, so neither him who shall rise after death mortal, because he is dissolved
by death. For, tell me, if a man blush a little, should we say that he was
continually ruddy? Not so, for the action is not a habit. If one become pale,
should we call him jaundiced? No, for the affection is but temporary. And so you
would not call him mortal, who has been for but a short time in the hands of
death. Since in this way we may speak of those who sleep, for they are dead, so
to say, and without action. But does death corrupt our bodies? What of that? It is
not that they may remain in corruption, but that they be made better. Let us then

conquer the world, let us run to immortality, let us follow our King, let us too set
up a trophy, let us despise the world's pleasures. We need no toil to do so; let us
transfer our souls to heaven, and all the world is conquered. If you desire it not,
it is conquered; if you deride it, it is worsted. Strangers are we and sojourners, let
us then not grieve at any of its painful things. For if, being sprung from a
renowned country, and from illustrious ancestors, you had gone into some
distant land, being known to no one, having with you neither servants nor
wealth, and then some one had insulted you, you would not grieve as though you
had suffered these things at home. For the knowing clearly that you were in a
strange and foreign land, would persuade you to bear all easily, and to despise
hunger, and thirst, and any suffering whatever. Consider this also now, that you
are a stranger and a sojourner, and let nothing disturb you in this foreign land;
for you have a City whose Artificer and Creator is God, and the sojourning itself
is but for a short and little time. Let whoever will strike, insult, revile; we are in
a strange land, and live but meanly; the dreadful thing would be, to suffer so in
our own country, before our fellow citizens, then is the greatest unseemliness
and loss. For if a man be where he had none that knows him, he endures all
easily, because insult becomes more grievous from the intention of those who
offer it. For instance, if a man insult the governor, knowing that he is governor,
then the insult is bitter; but if he insult, supposing him to be a private man, he
cannot even touch him who undergoes the insult. So let us reason also. For
neither do our revilers know what we are, as, that we are citizens of heaven,
registered for the country which is above, fellow-choristers of the Cherubim. Let
us not then grieve nor deem their insult to be insult; had they known, they would
not have insulted us. Do they deem us poor and mean? Neither let us count this
an insult. For tell me, if a traveler having got before his servants, were sitting a
little space in the inn waiting for them, and then the innkeeper, or some travelers,
should behave rudely to him, and revile him, would he not laugh at the other's
ignorance? Would not their mistake rather give him pleasure? Would he not feel
a satisfaction as though not he but some one else were insulted? Let us too