Persons are distinguished one from another solely by their mutual relations. And the like
argument holds of the Holy Ghost.
A likeness of the divine Trinity is observable in the human mind. That mind, by actually
understanding itself, conceives its `word' in itself, which `word' is nothing else than what
is called the `intellectual expression (intentio intellecta, cf. B. I, Chap.LIII) existing
in the mind; which mind, going on to love itself, produces itself in the will as an object
loved. Further it does not proceed, but is confined and complete in a circle, returning by
love to its own substance, whence the process originally began by formation of the
`intellectual expression' of that substance. There is however a process going out to
exterior effects, as the mind for love of itself proceeds to some action beyond itself.
Thus we remark in the mind three things: the mind itself, whence the process starts
within its own nature; the mind conceived in the understanding; and the mind loved in
the will. And so we have seen that there is in the divine nature a God unbegotten, the
Father, the origin of the entire procession of Deity; and a God begotten after the manner
of a `word' conceived in the understanding, namely, the Son; and a God proceeding by
mode of love, who is the Holy Ghost: beyond Him there is no further procession within
the divine nature, but only a proceeding to exterior effects. But the representation of the
divine Trinity in us falls short, in regard of Father, Son and Holy Ghost being one nature,
and each of them a perfect Person. Hence there is said to be in the mind of man
the `image' of God: Let us make man to our image and likeness (Gen. i, 26). But as for
the irrational creation, on account of the remoteness and obscurity of the representation
as found in them, there is said to be the `foot-print' of the Trinity, but not the `image'
(vestigium, non imago).

## CHAPTER XXVII--Of the Incarnation of the Word according to the Tradition of Holy
Scripture
OF all the works of God, the mystery of the Incarnation most transcends reason.
Nothing more astonishing could be imagined as done by God than that the true God
and Son of God should become true man. To this chief of wonders all other wonders
are subordinate. We confess this wonderful Incarnation under the teaching of divine
authority, John i, 14: Phil. ii, 6-11. The words of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself also
declare it, in that sometimes He says of Himself humble and human things, e.g., The
Father is greater than I (John xiv, 28): My soul is sorrowful even unto death (Matt. xxvi,
38): which belonged to Him in the humanity which He had assumed: at other times lofty
and divine things, e.g., I and the Father are one (John x, 30): All things that the Father
hath are mine (John xvi, 15): which attach to Him in His divine nature. And the actions
that are recorded of Him show the same duality of nature. His being stricken with fear,
sadness, hunger, death, belongs to His human nature: His healing the sick by His own
power, His raising the dead and effectually commanding the elements, His casting out
of devils, forgiving of sins, His rising from the dead when He willed, and finally
ascending into heaven, show the power of God that was in Him.