FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.2.

apprehensive power presents the object to the appetite. Accordingly,
that act whereby the will tends to something proposed to it as being
good, through being ordained to the end by the reason, is materially
an act of the will, but formally an act of the reason. Now in such like
matters the substance of the act is as the matter in comparison to
the order imposed by the higher power. Wherefore choice is
substantially not an act of the reason but of the will: for choice is
accomplished in a certain movement of the soul towards the good
which is chosen. Consequently it is evidently an act of the appetitive
power.
Reply to Objection 1: Choice implies a previous comparison; not that
it consists in the comparison itself.
Reply to Objection 2: It is quite true that it is for the reason to draw
the conclusion of a practical syllogism; and it is called "a decision"
or "judgment," to be followed by "choice." And for this reason the
conclusion seems to belong to the act of choice, as to that which
results from it.
Reply to Objection 3: In speaking "of ignorance of choice," we do not
mean that choice is a sort of knowledge, but that there is ignorance
of what ought to be chosen.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether choice is to be found in irrational

animals?
Objection 1: It would seem that irrational animals are able to choose.
For choice "is the desire of certain things on account of an end," as
stated in Ethic. iii, 2,3. But irrational animals desire something on
account of an end: since they act for an end, and from desire.
Therefore choice is in irrational animals.
Objection 2: Further, the very word "electio" [choice] seems to
signify the taking of something in preference to others. But irrational
animals take something in preference to others: thus we can easily
see for ourselves that a sheep will eat one grass and refuse another.
Therefore choice is in irrational animals.
Objection 3: Further, according to Ethic. vi, 12, "it is from prudence
that a man makes a good choice of means." But prudence is found in
irrational animals: hence it is said in the beginning of Metaph. i, 1
that "those animals which, like bees, cannot hear sounds, are
prudent by instinct." We see this plainly, in wonderful cases of
sagacity manifested in the works of various animals, such as bees,
spiders, and dogs. For a hound in following a stag, on coming to a
crossroad, tries by scent whether the stag has passed by the first or
the second road: and if he find that the stag has not passed there,
being thus assured, takes to the third road without trying the scent;
as though he were reasoning by way of exclusion, arguing that the
stag must have passed by this way, since he did not pass by the
others, and there is no other road. Therefore it seems that irrational
animals are able to choose.
On the contrary, Gregory of Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxxiii.]
says that "children and irrational animals act willingly but not from
choice." Therefore choice is not in irrational animals.
I answer that, Since choice is the taking of one thing in preference to
another it must of necessity be in respect of several things that can
be chosen. Consequently in those things which are altogether
determinate to one there is no place for choice. Now the difference
between the sensitive appetite and the will is that, as stated above
(Question 1, Article 2, ad 3), the sensitive appetite is determinate to
one particular thing, according to the order of nature; whereas the