the call be unto cleansing, [Comp. 1 Corinthians 1:4-7] and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, and grace, and a free gift, and the good things in
store, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard; and it be God that calls, and calls by
Himself; what pardon can they deserve, who come not running to Him? Let no
one therefore accuse God; for unbelief comes not of Him that calls, but of those
who start away ([ἀποπηδῶντας]) from Him.
9. But some man will say, "He ought to bring men in, even against their
will." Away with this. He does not use violence, nor compel; for who that bids to
honors, and crowns, and banquets, and festivals, drags people, unwilling and
bound? No one. For this is the part of one inflicting an insult. Unto hell He sends
men against their will, but unto the kingdom He calls willing minds. To the fire
He brings men bound and bewailing themselves: to the endless state of blessings
not so. Else it is a reproach to the very blessings themselves, if their nature be
not such as that men should run to them of their own accord and with many
thanks.
"Whence it is then," say you, "that all men do not choose them?" From their
own infirmity. "And wherefore does He not cut off their infirmity?" And how tell
me— in what way— ought He to cut it off? Hath He not made a world that
teaches His loving-kindness and His power? For [Psalm 19:1] "the heavens,"
says one, "declare the glory of God." Hath He not also sent prophets? Hath He
not both called and honored us? Hath He not done wonders? Hath He not given a
law both written and natural? Hath He not sent His Son? Hath he not
commissioned Apostles? Hath He not wrought sins? Hath He not threatened
hell? Hath He not promised the kingdom? Does He not every day make His sun
to rise? Are not the things which He has enjoined so simple and easy, that many
transcend His commandments in the greatness of their self-denial? "What was
there to do unto the vineyard and I have not done it?" [Isaiah 5:4]
10. "And why," say you, "did He not make knowledge and virtue natural to
us?" Who speaks thus? The Greek or the Christian? Both of them, indeed, but
not about the same things: for the one raises his objection with a view to

knowledge, the other with a view to conduct. First, then, we will reply to him
who is on our side; for I do not so much regard those without, as our own
members.
What then says the Christian? "It were meet to have implanted in us the
knowledge itself of virtue." He has implanted it; for if he had not done so,
whence should we have known what things are to be done, what left undone?
Whence are the laws and the tribunals? But "God should have imparted not
[merely] knowledge, but also the very doing of it [virtue]." For what then would
you have to be rewarded, if the whole were of God? For tell me, does God
punish in the same manner you and the Greek upon committing sin ? Surely not.
For up to a certain point you have confidence, viz. that which arises from the
true knowledge. What then, if any one should now say that on the score of
knowledge thou and the Greek will be accounted of like desert? Would it not
disgust you? I think so, indeed. For you would say that the Greek, having of his
own wherewith to attain knowledge, was not willing. If then the latter also
should say that God ought to have implanted knowledge in us naturally, will you
not laugh him to scorn, and say to him, "But why did you not seek for it? Why
were you not in earnest even as I?" And you will stand firm with much
confidence, and say that it was extreme folly to blame God for not implanting
knowledge by nature. And this you will say, because you have obtained what
appertains to knowledge. So also had you performed what appertains to practice,
you would not have raised these questions: but you are tired of virtuous practice,
therefore you shelter yourself with these inconsiderate words. But how could it
be at all right to cause that by necessity one should become good? Then shall we
next have the brute beasts contending with us about virtue, seeing that some of
them are more temperate than ourselves.
But you say, "I had rather have been good by necessity, and so forfeited all
rewards, than evil by deliberate choice, to be punished and suffer vengeance."
But it is impossible that one should ever be good by necessity. If therefore you
know not what ought to be done, show it, and then we will tell you what is right