2 Corinthians 6:3
"Giving no occasion of stumbling, that our ministration be not blamed,"
persuading them not from considering "the time" only, but also those that had
successfully labored with them. And behold with what absence of pride. For he
said not, 'Look at us how we are such and such,' but, for the present, it is only to
do away accusation that he relates his own conduct. And he mentions two chief
points of a blameless life, "none" in "any" thing. And he said not 'accusation,'
but, what was far less, "occasion of stumbling;" that is, giving ground against us
to none for censure, for condemnation, "that our ministration be not blamed;"
that is, that none may take hold of it. And again, he said not, 'that it be not
accused,' but that it may not have the least fault, nor any one have it in his power
to animadvert upon it in any particular.

2 Corinthians 6:4
"But in every thing commending ourselves as ministers of God."
This is far greater. For it is not the same thing to be free from accusation;
and to exhibit such a character as in everything to appear "ministers of God." For
neither is it the same thing to be quit of accusation, and to be covered with
praises. And he said not appearing, but "commending," that is 'proving.' Then he
mentions also whence they became such. Whence then was it? "In much
patience," he says, laying the foundation of those good things. Wherefore he said
not barely "patience," but "much," and he shows also how great it was. For to
bear some one or two things is no great matter. But he adds even snow storms of
trials in the words, "In afflictions, in necessities." This is a heightening of
affliction, when the evils are unavoidable, and there lies upon one as it were a
necessity hardly extricable of misfortune. "In distresses." Either he means those
of hunger and of other necessaries, or else simply those of their trials.

2 Corinthians 6:5-6
"In stripes, in imprisonments, in tossings to and fro. "
Yet every one of these by itself was intolerable, the being scourged only,
and being bound only, and being unable through persecution to remain fixed any
where, (for this is in 'tossings to and fro,') but when both all, and all at once,
assail, consider what a soul they need. Then along with the things from without,
he mentions those imposed by himself.
"In labors, in watchings, in fastings; in pureness."
But by "pureness" here, he means either chasteness again, or general purity,
or incorruptness, or even his preaching the Gospel freely.
"In knowledge." What is "in knowledge?" In wisdom such as is given from
God; that which is truly knowledge; not as those that seem to be wise and boast
of their acquaintance with the heathen discipline, but are deficient in this.
"In long-suffering, in kindness." For this also is a great note of a noble soul,
though exasperated and goaded on every side, to bear all with long-suffering.
Then to show whence he became such, he added;
"In the Holy Ghost." 'For in Him,' he says, 'we do all these good works.' But
observe when it is that he has mentioned the aid of the Holy Ghost. After he had
set forth what was from himself. Moreover, he seems to me to say another thing
herein. What then is this? Namely, 'we have both been filled with abundance of
the Spirit and hereby also give a proof of our Apostleship in that we have been
counted worthy of spiritual gifts.' For if this be grace also, yet still he himself
was the cause who by his good works and his toils attracted that grace. And if
any should assert that besides what has been said, he shows that in his use of the
gifts of the Spirit also he gave none offense; he would not miss of his meaning.
For they who received the [gift of] tongues among them and were lifted up, were
blamed. For it is possible for one even in receiving a gift of the Spirit, not to use