things, but because a thing is made lucid by the light. In like manner,
the soul is said to be the "act of a body," etc., because by the soul it
is a body, and is organic, and has life potentially. Yet the first act is
said to be in potentiality to the second act, which is operation; for
such a potentiality "does not reject"---that is, does not exclude---the
soul.
Reply to Objection 2: The soul does not move the body by its
essence, as the form of the body, but by the motive power, the act of
which presupposes the body to be already actualized by the soul: so
that the soul by its motive power is the part which moves; and the
animate body is the part moved.
Reply to Objection 3: We observe in matter various degrees of
perfection, as existence, living, sensing, and understanding. Now
what is added is always more perfect. Therefore that form which
gives matter only the first degree of perfection is the most imperfect;
while that form which gives the first, second, and third degree, and
so on, is the most perfect: and yet it inheres to matter immediately.
Reply to Objection 4: Avicenna held that the substantial forms of the
elements remain entire in the mixed body; and that the mixture is
made by the contrary qualities of the elements being reduced to an
average. But this is impossible, because the various forms of the
elements must necessarily be in various parts of matter; for the
distinction of which we must suppose dimensions, without which
matter cannot be divisible. Now matter subject to dimension is not to
be found except in a body. But various bodies cannot be in the same
place. Whence it follows that elements in the mixed body would be
distinct as to situation. And then there would not be a real mixture
which is in respect of the whole; but only a mixture apparent to
sense, by the juxtaposition of particles.
Averroes maintained that the forms of elements, by reason of their
imperfection, are a medium between accidental and substantial
forms, and so can be "more" or "less"; and therefore in the mixture
they are modified and reduced to an average, so that one form
emerges from them. But this is even still more impossible. For the
substantial being of each thing consists in something indivisible,
and every addition and subtraction varies the species, as in
numbers, as stated in Metaph. viii (Did. vii, 3); and consequently it is
impossible for any substantial form to receive "more" or "less." Nor
is it less impossible for anything to be a medium between substance

and accident.
Therefore we must say, in accordance with the Philosopher (De
Gener. i, 10), that the forms of the elements remain in the mixed
body, not actually but virtually. For the proper qualities of the
elements remain, though modified; and in them is the power of the
elementary forms. This quality of the mixture is the proper
disposition for the substantial form of the mixed body; for instance,
the form of a stone, or of any sort of soul.