from it; I say not this; for I did not say, "Give ye diligence to bring forward your
own good deeds," neither did I say, "Show them;" but "Let your light shine."
That is, "Let your virtue be great, and the fire abundant, and the light
unspeakable." For when virtue is so great, it cannot lie hidden, though its
pursuer shade it over ten thousand fold. Present unto them an irreprehensible
life, and let them have no true occasion of evil speaking; and then, though there
be thousands of evil-speakers, no man shall be able to cast any shade upon you.
And well did He say, "your light," for nothing makes a man so illustrious, how
manifold soever his will to be concealed, as the manifestation of virtue. For as if
he were clad with the very sunbeam, so he shines, yet brighter than it; not
spending his rays on earth, but surmounting also Heaven itself.
Hence also He comforts them more abundantly. For, "What though the
slander pain you," says He; yet shall you have many to honor God on your
account. And in both ways your recompence is gathering, as well because God is
glorified through you, as because you are defamed for God's sake. Thus, lest we
should on purpose seek to be reproached, on hearing that there is a reward for it:
first, He has not expressed that sentiment simply, but with two limitations,
namely, when what is said is false, and when it is for God's sake:— and next He
signifies how not that only, but also good report, has its great profit, the glory of
it passing on to God. And He holds out to them those gracious hopes. "For," says
He, the calumny of the wicked avails not so much as to put all others in the dark,
in respect of seeing your light. For then only when you have "lost your savor"
shall they tread you under foot; but not when you are falsely accused, doing
right. Yea, rather then shall there be many admiring, not you only, but for your
sake your Father also. And He said not "God," but "your Father;" already
sowing beforehand the seeds of that noble birth, which was about to be bestowed
upon them. Moreover, indicating His parity in honor, as He said above, "Grieve
not when you are evil spoken of, for it is enough for you that for my sake you are
thus spoken of;" so here He mentions the Father: every where manifesting His
equality.

12. Since then we know the gain that arises from this earnestness, and the
danger of indolence (for if our Lord be blasphemed because of us, that were far
worse than our perdition), let us "give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to
the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God." [1 Corinthians 10:32] And while the life
which we present before them is brighter than the sun, yet if any one will speak
evil of us, let us not grieve at being defamed, but only if we be defamed with
justice.
For, on the one hand, if we live in wickedness, though there be none to
speak ill of us, we shall be the most wretched of all men: on the other hand, if we
apply ourselves to virtue, though the whole world speak evil of us, at that very
time we shall be more enviable than any. And we shall draw on to follow us all
who choose to be saved, for not the calumny of the wicked, but our good life,
will draw their attention. For indeed no trumpet is so clear as the proof that is
given by our actions: neither is the light itself so transparent as a pure life,
though our calumniators be beyond number.
I say, if all the above-mentioned qualities be ours; if we be meek and lowly
and merciful; if we be pure, and peacemakers; if hearing reproach, we revile not
again, but rather rejoice; then shall we attract all that observe us no less than the
miracles do. And all will be kindly disposed towards us, though one be a wild
beast, a demon, or what you will.
Or if there should even be some who speak evil of you, be not at all
troubled thereat, nor because they revile you in public, regard it; but search into
their conscience, and you shall see them applauding and admiring you, and
numbering up ten thousand praises.
See, for instance, how Nebuchadnezzar praises the children in the furnace;
yet surely he was an adversary and an enemy. But upon seeing them stand nobly,
he proclaims their triumph, and crowns them: and that for nought else, but
because they disobeyed him, and hearkened unto the law of God. For the devil,
when he sees himself effecting nothing, from that time departs, fearing lest he
should be the cause of our winning more crowns. And when he is gone, even one