to be in place.

And if the last sphere should not be in place, this is so only because nothing can be outside it, but
not because it is lacking in the aforesaid aptitude to occupy place.

Hence there are others who concede that, absolutely, no two bodies can be in the same place at
the same time, and they assign the reason for this to mathematical principles, which ought to be
observed in all the natural sciences, as is said in III Coel. et mun. But this reason does not seem
fitting, because it does not pertain to the objects of mathematics to be in place, except improperly
and by similitude, as is said in II De generatione. Hence, the reason for maintaining this
impediment should not be derived from mathematical principles, but from the principles of
natural things, to which place is properly due. Furthermore, mathematical reasoning is
sufficiently conclusive only in regard to its own matter. For, although mathematical truths are
preserved in natural sciences, beings of the natural order add something over and above what is
possessed by, mathematical beings: namely, sensible matter; and because of this addition it is
possible to assign as an explanation of something in the natural order what would not be
assigned in explanation of an object of mathematics. For in mathematics no reason for diversity
of two given lines can be assigned except because of their situation; wherefore, if diversity of
situation is removed, there remains no plurality of mathematical lines, and likewise no diversity
of surfaces or of bodies. On this account mathematical bodies cannot be both many and
simultaneous, and in like manner neither can lines or surfaces.

But in regard to corporeal things in nature, it is possible to assign another and different reason
for diversity: namely, that of sensible matter, even though diversity of situation were removed.
Hence the reasoning which proves that two mathematical bodies cannot be simultaneously in the
same place does not suffice for proving that two bodies in the natural order could not be
simultaneous. And therefore the explanation of Avicenna must be accepted, which he uses in his
Sufficientia, in the treatise De loco. In this explanation he assigns as reason of the aforesaid
prohibition one which, by natural principles, is owing to the very nature of corporeity itself. For
he says there can be no cause of this prohibition except that it pertains, first and per se, to a thing
to be in place: but this means that it is destined by its nature to fill a place. Moreover, it does not
pertain to a form to be in place, except accidentally; although certain forms are the principles by
which a body is inclined to this or that place. Likewise neither does it pertain to matter,
considered per se, to be in place, because, as so considered, it is understood apart from all
genera, as is said in VII Metaph. Wherefore it must be that matter, according as it is subject to
that by which it has primary relation to place, is the cause of this prohibition; but it is related to
place inasmuch as it is subject to dimensions: hence it is by nature of matter subject to
dimensions that many bodies are prohibited from being in the same place.