THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.9.

incarnate.
I answer that, It was most fitting that the Person of the Son should
become incarnate. First, on the part of the union; for such as are
similar are fittingly united. Now the Person of the Son, Who is the
Word of God, has a certain common agreement with all creatures,
because the word of the craftsman, i.e. his concept, is an exemplar
likeness of whatever is made by him. Hence the Word of God, Who is
His eternal concept, is the exemplar likeness of all creatures. And
therefore as creatures are established in their proper species,
though movably, by the participation of this likeness, so by the nonparticipated and personal union of the Word with a creature, it was
fitting that the creature should be restored in order to its eternal and
unchangeable perfection; for the craftsman by the intelligible form of
his art, whereby he fashioned his handiwork, restores it when it has
fallen into ruin. Moreover, He has a particular agreement with human
nature, since the Word is a concept of the eternal Wisdom, from
Whom all man's wisdom is derived. And hence man is perfected in
wisdom (which is his proper perfection, as he is rational) by
participating the Word of God, as the disciple is instructed by
receiving the word of his master. Hence it is said (Ecclus. 1:5): "The
Word of God on high is the fountain of wisdom." And hence for the
consummate perfection of man it was fitting that the very Word of
God should be personally united to human nature.
Secondly, the reason of this fitness may be taken from the end of the
union, which is the fulfilling of predestination, i.e. of such as are
preordained to the heavenly inheritance, which is bestowed only on
sons, according to Rm. 8:17: "If sons, heirs also." Hence it was
fitting that by Him Who is the natural Son, men should share this
likeness of sonship by adoption, as the Apostle says in the same
chapter (Rm. 8:29): "For whom He foreknew, He also predestinated
to be made conformable to the image of His Son."
Thirdly, the reason for this fitness may be taken from the sin of our
first parent, for which the Incarnation supplied the remedy. For the
first man sinned by seeking knowledge, as is plain from the words of
the serpent, promising to man the knowledge of good and evil.
Hence it was fitting that by the Word of true knowledge man might be
led back to God, having wandered from God through an inordinate
thirst for knowledge.
Reply to Objection 1: There is nothing which human malice cannot

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.9.

abuse, since it even abuses God's goodness, according to Rm. 2:4:
"Or despisest thou the riches of His goodness?" Hence, even if the
Person of the Father had become incarnate, men would have been
capable of finding an occasion of error, as though the Son were not
able to restore human nature.
Reply to Objection 2: The first creation of things was made by the
power of God the Father through the Word; hence the second
creation ought to have been brought about through the Word, by the
power of God the Father, in order that restoration should correspond
to creation according to 2 Cor. 5:19: "For God indeed was in Christ
reconciling the world to Himself."
Reply to Objection 3: To be the gift of the Father and the Son is
proper to the Holy Ghost. But the remission of sins is caused by the
Holy Ghost, as by the gift of God. And hence it was more fitting to
man's justification that the Son should become incarnate, Whose gift
the Holy Ghost is.