on (he is a free man, who is for his own sake, and not for the sake of another), we find
sui caus, hautou eneka, `for his own sake.'

CHAPTERS XVI and XXIII--Replies to Arguments alleged against the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost
CHAP. XVI. It was the position of Arius that the Son and Holy Ghost were creatures, the
Son however being greater than the Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost being His minister,
even as he said the Son was to the Father. After Arius came Macedonius, who
was orthodox on the point of the Father and Son being of one and the same substance,
but refused to believe the same of the Holy Ghost, and said that He was a creature.
Chap. XXIII. 2. He shall not speak of himself but whatsoever things he shall hear, he
shall speak (John xvi, 13). Since all the knowledge and power and action of God is the
essence of God, all the knowledge and power and action of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost is from another; but that of the Son is from the Father only, that of the Holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son. To hear then, on the part of the Holy Ghost, signifies His
taking knowledge, as He takes essence, from the Father and the Son.
3. The Son of God is said to have been sent in this sense, that He appeared to man in
visible flesh; and, thus came to be in the world in a new way, in which He had not been
before, namely, visibly, although He had always been there invisibly as God. And the
Son's doing this came to Him of His Father: hence in this respect He is said to be 'sent'
by the Father. In like manner the Holy Ghost too appeared visibly both in the
appearance of a dove over Christ in His baptism, and in fiery tongues over the Apostles;
and though He did not become a dove or fire, still He appeared under such visible
appearances as signs of Himself. And thus He too came to be in a new way in the
world, visibly; and this He had of the Father and of the Son, hence He is said to be 'sent'
by the Father and the Son, which does not imply inferiority in Him, but procession.
There is yet another way in which the Holy Ghost is said to be sent, and that invisibly.
The Son proceeds from the Father as the knowledge wherewith God knows Himself;
and the Holy Ghost proceeds from Father and Son as the love wherewith God loves
Himself. Hence when through the Holy Ghost one is made a lover of God, the Holy
Ghost is an indweller in him; and thus He comes to be in a new way in man, in point of
the new special effect of His indwelling in man. Now that the Holy Ghost works this
effect in man, comes to Him of the Father and the Son; and therefore He is said to be
invisibly sent by Father and Son.
4. Nor is the Holy Ghost excluded from the Divinity by the occasional mention of the
Father and the Son without the Holy Ghost (Matt. xi, 27: John xvii, 3: Rom. i, 7: 1 Cor.
viii, 6): for hereby the Scripture silently intimates that whatever attribute of divinity is
predicated of one of the three, must be understood of them, all, seeing that they are one
God. God the Father can never be taken to be without the Word and without Love; and
the Word and Love cannot be taken to be without the Father. Hence it is said of the
Son: No one knoweth the Father but the Son (Matt. xi, 27): so it is also said of the Holy
Ghost: The things that are of God, none knoweth but the Spirit of God (1 Cor. ii, 11):
though it is certain that neither the Father nor the Son is excluded from this knowledge
of divine things.