and lay hold on eternal life. Yea, I beseech and implore you by your former
reputation, by that confidence which once was yours, let us see you once again
standing on the pinnacle of virtue, and in the same condition of perseverance as
before. Spare those who are made to stumble on your account, those who are
falling, who are becoming more indolent, who are despairing of the way of
virtue. For dejection now holds possession of the band of brethren, while
pleasure and cheerfulness prevail in the councils of the unbelieving, and of those
young men who are disposed to indolence. But if you return again to your
former strictness of life the result will be reversed, and all our shame will be
transferred to them, while we shall enjoy much confidence, seeing you again
crowned and proclaimed victor with more splendour than before. For such
victories bring greater renown and pleasure. For you will not only receive the
reward of your own achievements, but also of the exhortation and consolation of
others, being exhibited as a striking model, if ever any one should fall into the
same condition, to encourage him to get up and recover himself. Do not neglect
such an opportunity of gain, nor drag our souls down into Hades with sorrow,
but let us breathe freely again, and shake off the cloud of despondency which
oppresses us on your account. For now, passing by the consideration of our own
troubles, we mourn over your calamities, but if you are willing to come to your
senses, and see clearly, and to join the angelic host, you will release us from this
sorrow, and will take away the greater part of sins. For that it is possible for
those who have come back again after repentance to shine with much lustre, and
oftentimes more than those who have never fallen at all, I have demonstrated
from the divine writings. Thus at least both the publicans and the harlots inherit
the kingdom of Heaven, thus many of the last are placed before the first.
17. But I will tell you also of events which have happened in our own time,
and of which you may yourself have been witness. You know probably that
young Phœnician, the son of Urbanus, who was untimely left an orphan, but
possessed of much money, and many slaves and lands. This man, having in the
first place bidden complete farewell to his studies in the schools, and having laid

aside the gay clothing which he formerly wore, and all his worldly grandeur,
suddenly arraying himself in a shabby cloak, and retreating to the solitude of the
mountains, exhibited a high degree of Christian philosophy not merely in
proportion to his age, but such as any great and wonderful man might have
displayed. And after this, having been deemed worthy of initiation into the
sacred mysteries, he made still greater advances in virtue. And all were
rejoicing, and glorifying God, that one nurtured in wealth, and having illustrious
ancestors, and being still a mere youth, should have suddenly trodden all the
pomps of this life under foot, and have ascended to the true height. Now which
he was in this condition, and an object of admiration, certain corrupt men, who
according to the law of kindred had the oversight of him dragged him back again
into the former sea of worldliness. And so, having flung aside all his habits, he
again descended from the mountains into the midst of the forum, and used to go
all round the city, riding on horseback, and accompanied by a large retinue; and
he was no longer willing to live even soberly; for being inflamed by much
luxury, he was constrained to fall into foolish love intrigues, and there was no
one of those conversant with him, who did not despair of his salvation; he was
encompassed by such a swarm of flatterers, besides the snares of orphanhood,
youth, and great wealth. And persons who readily find fault with everything,
accused those who originally conducted him to this way of life, saying that he
had both missed his spiritual aims, and would no longer be of any use in the
management of his own affairs, having prematurely abandoned the labours of
study, and having been consequently unable to derive any benefit therefrom.
Now while these things were being said, and great shame was felt, certain holy
men who had often succeeded in this kind of chase, and had thoroughly learned
by experience that those who are armed with hope in God ought not to despair at
all of such characters, kept a continual watch upon him, and if ever they saw him
appear in the market place they approached and saluted him. And at first he
spoke to them from horseback, askance, as they followed by his side; so great
was the shamelessness which had at first got possession of him. But they, being