2 Corinthians 8:19
"And not only so."
What is, "and not only so?" 'Not only on this account,' he says, 'is respect
due to him, that he is approved as a preacher and is praised by all.'
"But he was also appointed by the churches along with us."
Whence it seems to me, that Barnabas is the person intimated. And he
signifies his dignity to be great, for he shows also for what office he was
appointed. For he says,
"To travel with us in the matter of this grace which is ministered by us." Do
you see how great are these praises of him? He shone as a preacher of the Gospel
and had all the churches testifying to this. He was chosen by us; and unto the
same office with Paul, and everywhere was partner with him, both in his trials
and in his dangers, for this is implied in the word "travel." But what is, "with this
grace which is ministered by us?" So as to proclaim the word, he means, and to
preach the Gospel; or to minister also in respect of the money; yea rather, he
seems to me to refer to both of these. Then he adds,
"To the glory of the same Lord, and to show your readiness. " What he
means is this: 'We thought good,' he says, 'that he should be chosen with us and
be appointed unto this work, so as to become a dispenser and a minister of the
sacred money.' Nor was this a little matter. For, "Look ye out," it says, "from
among you seven men of good report;" [Acts 6:3] and he was chosen by the
churches, and there was a vote of the whole people taken. What is, "to the glory
of the same Lord, and your readiness?" 'That both God may be glorified and you
may become the readier, they who are to receive this money being of proved
character, and no one able to engender any false suspicion against them.
Therefore we sought out such persons, and entrusted not the whole to one person
only, that he might escape this suspicion also; but we sent both Titus and another

with him. Then to interpret this same expression, "to the glory of the Lord and
your ready mind:" he added,

2 Corinthians 8:20
"Avoiding this, that any man should blame us in the matter of this bounty
which is ministered by us."
What can this be which is said? A thing worthy of the virtue of Paul; and
showing the greatness of his tender care and his condescension. 'For,' he says,
'that none should suspect us, nor have the slightest cavil against us, as though we
purloined anything of the money placed in our hands; therefore we send such
persons, and not one only, but even two or three.' Do you see how he clears them
of all suspicions? Not on account of the Gospel, nor of their having been chosen
merely; but also, from their being persons of proved character, (and for this very
reason) having been chosen, that they might not be suspected. And he said not
'that you should not blame,' but 'that no other person should.' And yet it was on
their account that he did this; and he implied as much in saying, "to the glory of
the same Lord, and your readiness:" however, he does not wish to wound them;
and so expresses himself differently,
"Avoiding this." And he is not satisfied with this either, but by what he adds,
soothes again, saying,
"In the matter of this bounty which is ministered by us," and mingling his
severity with praise. For that they might not feel hurt, and say, 'Is he obliged then
to eye us stealthily, and are we so miserable as ever to have been suspected of
these things?' Providing a correction against this too, he says, 'the money sent by
you is of large amount, and this abundance, that is, the large amount of the
money, is enough to afford suspicion to the evil-minded had we not offered that
security. '