say, "For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as
your servants for Jesus' sake." [2 Corinthians 4:5]
These are absurdities and trifles! Scripture says, He "emptied Himself."
How did He empty Himself? Tell me. What was His emptying? What His
humiliation? Was it because He wrought wonders? This both Paul and Peter did,
so that this was not peculiar to the Son. What then means, "Being made in the
likeness of men"? He had many things belonging to us, and many He had not; for
instance, He was not born of wedlock. He did no sin. These things had He which
no man has. He was not what he seemed only, but He was God also; He seemed
to be a man, but He was not like the mass of men. For He was like them in flesh.
He means then, that He was not a mere man. Wherefore he says, "in the likeness
of men." For we indeed are soul and body, but He was God, and soul and body,
wherefore he says, "in the likeness." For lest when you hear that He emptied
Himself, you should think that some change, and degeneracy, and loss is here; he
says, while He remained what He was, He took that which He was not, and
being made flesh He remained God, in that He was the Word. [John 1:14]
In this then He was like man, and for this cause Paul says, "and in fashion."
Not that His nature degenerated, nor that any confusion arose, but He became
man in fashion. For when He had said that "He took the form of a servant," he
made bold to say this also, seeing that the first would silence all objectors; since
when he says, "In the likeness of sinful flesh," he says not that He had not flesh,
but that that flesh sinned not, but was like to sinful flesh. Like in what? In
nature, not in sin, therefore was His like a sinful soul. As then in the former case
the term similarity was used, because He was not equal in everything, so here
also there is similarity, because He is not equal in everything, as His not being
born of wedlock, His being without sin, His being not a mere man. And he well
said "as a man," for He was not one of the many, but "as" one of the many. The
Word who was God did not degenerate into man, nor was His substance
changed, but he appeared as a man; not to delude us with a phantom, but to
instruct us in humility. When therefore he says, "as a man," this is what He

means; since he calls Him a man elsewhere also, when he says, "there is one
God, one Mediator also between God and men, Himself man, Christ Jesus." [1
Timothy 2:5]
Thus much against these heretics. I must now speak against such as deny
that He took a soul. If "the form of God" is "perfect God," then the "form of a
servant" is "a perfect servant." Again, against the Arians. Here concerning His
divinity, we no longer find "He became," "He took," but "He emptied Himself,
taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men"; here concerning
his humanity we find "He took, He became." He became the latter, He took the
latter; He was the former. Let us not then confound nor divide the natures. There
is one God, there is one Christ, the Son of God; when I say "One," I mean a
union, not a confusion; the one Nature did not degenerate into the other, but was
united with it.
"He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto death, yea, the death of the
cross." See, says one, He voluntarily became obedient; he was not equal to Him
whom He obeyed. O you obstinate ones and unwise! This does not at all lower
Him. For we too become obedient to our friends, yet this has no effect. He
became obedient as a Son to His Father; He fell not thus into a servile state, but
by this very act above all others guarded his wondrous Sonship, by thus greatly
honoring the Father. He honored the Father, not that you should dishonor Him,
but that you should the rather admire Him, and learn from this act, that He is a
true Son, in honoring His Father more than all besides. No one has thus honored
God. As was His height, such was the correspondent humiliation which He
underwent. As He is greater than all, and no one is equal to Him, so in honoring
His Father, He surpassed all, not by necessity, nor unwillingly, but this too is part
of His excellence; yea, words fail me. Truly it is a great and unspeakable thing,
that He became a servant; that He underwent death, is far greater; but there is
something still greater, and more strange; why? All deaths are not alike; His
death seemed to be the most ignominious of all, to be full of shame, to be
accursed; for it is written, "Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree."