THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ should have been tempted in the

desert?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have been tempted
in the desert. Because Christ wished to be tempted in order to give
us an example, as stated above (Article 1). But an example should be
set openly before those who are to follow it. Therefore He should not
have been tempted in the desert.
Objection 2: Further, Chrysostom says (Hom. xii in Matth.): "Then
most especially does the devil assail by tempting us, when he sees
us alone. Thus did he tempt the woman in the beginning when he
found her apart from her husband." Hence it seems that, by going
into the desert to be tempted, He exposed Himself to temptation.
Since, therefore, His temptation is an example to us, it seems that
others too should take such steps as will lead them into temptation.
And yet this seems a dangerous thing to do, since rather should we
avoid the occasion of being tempted.
Objection 3: Further, Mt. 4:5, Christ's second temptation is set down,
in which "the devil took" Christ up "into the Holy City, and set Him
upon the pinnacle of the Temple": which is certainly not in the
desert. Therefore He was not tempted in the desert only.
On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 1:13) that Jesus "was in the desert
forty days and forty nights, and was tempted by Satan."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 2), Christ of His own freewill exposed Himself to be tempted by the devil, just as by His own
free-will He submitted to be killed by His members; else the devil
would not have dared to approach Him. Now the devil prefers to
assail a man who is alone, for, as it is written (Eccles. 4:12), "if a man
prevail against one, two shall withstand him." And so it was that
Christ went out into the desert, as to a field of battle, to be tempted
there by the devil. Hence Ambrose says on Lk. 4:1, that "Christ was
led into the desert for the purpose of provoking the devil. For had
he," i.e. the devil, "not fought, He," i.e. Christ, "would not have
conquered." He adds other reasons, saying that "Christ in doing this
set forth the mystery of Adam's delivery from exile," who had been
expelled from paradise into the desert, and "set an example to us, by
showing that the devil envies those who strive for better things."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: Christ is set as an example to all through faith,
according to Heb. 12:2: "Looking on Jesus, the author and finisher of
faith." Now faith, as it is written (Rm. 10:17), "cometh by hearing,"
but not by seeing: nay, it is even said (Jn. 20:29): "Blessed are they
that have not seen and have believed." And therefore, in order that
Christ's temptation might be an example to us, it behooved that men
should not see it, and it was enough that they should hear it related.
Reply to Objection 2: The occasions of temptation are twofold. one is
on the part of man---for instance, when a man causes himself to be
near to sin by not avoiding the occasion of sinning. And such
occasions of temptation should be avoided, as it is written of Lot
(Gn. 19:17): "Neither stay thou in all the country about" Sodom.
Another occasion of temptation is on the part of the devil, who
always "envies those who strive for better things," as Ambrose says
(In Luc. iv, 1). And such occasions of temptation are not to be
avoided. Hence Chrysostom says (Hom. v in Matth. [Opus
Imperfectum]): "Not only Christ was led into the desert by the Spirit,
but all God's children that have the Holy Ghost. For it is not enough
for them to sit idle; the Holy Ghost urges them to endeavor to do
something great: which is for them to be in the desert from the
devil's standpoint, for no unrighteousness, in which the devil
delights, is there. Again, every good work, compared to the flesh and
the world, is the desert; because it is not according to the will of the
flesh and of the world." Now, there is no danger in giving the devil
such an occasion of temptation; since the help of the Holy Ghost,
who is the Author of the perfect deed, is more powerful than the
assault of the envious devil.
Reply to Objection 3: Some say that all the temptations took place in
the desert. Of these some say that Christ was led into the Holy City,
not really, but in an imaginary vision; while others say that the Holy
City itself, i.e. Jerusalem, is called "a desert," because it was
deserted by God. But there is no need for this explanation. For Mark
says that He was tempted in the desert by the devil, but not that He
was tempted in the desert only.