## Homily 5 on Matthew

Matthew 1:22-23.
"Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
Lord by the Prophet, saying, Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring
forth a Son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel."
I hear many say, "While we are here, and enjoying the privilege of hearing,
we are awed, but when we are gone out, we become altered men again, and the
flame of zeal is quenched." What then may be done, that this may not come to
pass? Let us observe whence it arises. Whence then does so great a change in us
arise? From the unbecoming employment of our time, and from the company of
evil men. For we ought not as soon as we retire from the Communion, to plunge
into business unsuited to the Communion, but as soon as ever we get home, to
take our Bible into our hands, and call our wife and children to join us in putting
together what we have heard, and then, not before, engage in the business of life.
For if after the bath you would not choose to hurry into the market place,
lest by the business in the market you should destroy the refreshment thence
derived; much more ought we to act on this principle after the Communion. But
as it is, we do the contrary, and in this very way throw away all. For while the
profitable effect of what has been said to us is not yet well fixed, the great force
of the things that press upon us from without sweeps all entirely away.
That this then may not be the case, when you retire from the Communion,
you must account nothing more necessary than that you should put together the
things that have been said to you. Yes, for it were the utmost folly for us, while
we give up five and even six days to the business of this life, not to bestow on
things spiritual so much as one day, or rather not so much as a small part of one
day. See ye not our own children, that whatever lessons are given them, those
they study throughout the whole day? This then let us do likewise, since

otherwise we shall derive no profit from coming here, drawing water daily into a
vessel with holes, and not bestowing on the retaining of what we have heard
even so much earnestness as we plainly show with respect to gold and silver. For
any one who has received a few pence both puts them into a bag and sets a seal
thereon; but we, having given us oracles more precious than either gold or costly
stones, and receiving the treasures of the Spirit, do not put them away in the
storehouses of our soul, but thoughtlessly and at random suffer them to escape
from our minds. Who then will pity us after all this, plotting against our own
interests, and casting ourselves into so deep poverty? Therefore, that this may
not be so, let us write it down an unalterable law for ourselves, for our wives,
and for our children, to give up this one day of the week entire to hearing, and to
the recollection of the things we have heard. For thus with greater aptness for
learning shall we approach what is next to be said; and to us the labor will be
less, and to you the profit greater, when, bearing in memory what has been lately
spoken, you hearken accordingly to what comes afterwards. For no little does
this also contribute towards the understanding of what is said, when you know
accurately the connection of the thoughts, which we are busy in weaving
together for you. For since it is not possible to set down all in one day, you must
by continued remembrance make the things laid before you on many days into a
kind of chain, and so wrap it about your soul: that the body of the Scriptures may
appear entire.
Therefore let us not either today go on to the subjects set before us, without
first recalling what was lately said to our memory.
2. But what are the things set before us today? "Now all this was done, that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying." In a
tone worthy of the wonder, with all his might he has uttered his voice, saying,
"Now all this was done." For when he saw the sea and the abyss of the love of
God towards man, and that actually come to pass which never had been looked
for, and nature's laws broken, and reconciliations made, Him who is above all
come down to him that is lower than all, and "the middle walls of partition