Hebrews 2:2-3
"For if the word spoken by Angels" (says he) "was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken
to us by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him?"
Why ought we to "give more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard"? Were not those former things of God, as well as these? Either then he
means "more earnest" than [to] the Law, or "very earnest"; not making
comparison, God forbid. For since, on account of the long space of time, they
had a great opinion of the Old Covenant, but these things had been despised as
yet new, he proves (more than his argument required) that we ought rather to
give heed to these. How? By saying in effect, Both these and those are of God,
but not in a like manner. And this he shows us afterwards: but for the present he
treats it somewhat superficially, but afterwards more clearly, saying "For if that
first covenant had been faultless" [Hebrews 8:7], and many other such things:
"for that which decays and waxes old is ready to vanish away." [Hebrews 8:13]
But as yet he ventures not to say any such thing in the beginning of his
discourse, nor until he shall have first occupied and possessed his hearer by his
fuller [arguments].
Why then ought we "to give more earnest heed"? "Lest at any time," says
he, "we should let them slip"— that is, lest at any time we should perish, lest we
should fall away. And here he shows the grievousness of this falling away, in
that it is a difficult thing for that which has fallen away to return again, inasmuch
as it has happened through wilful negligence. And he took this form of speech
from the Proverbs. For, says he, "my son [take heed] lest you fall away"
[Proverbs 3:21, Septuagint], showing both the easiness of the fall, and the
grievousness of the ruin. That is, our disobedience is not without danger. And

while by his mode of reasoning he shows that the chastisement is greater, yet
again he leaves it in the form of a question, and not in the conclusion. For indeed
this is to make one's discourse inoffensive, when one does not in every case of
one's self infer the judgment, but leaves it in the power of the hearer himself to
give sentence: and this would render them more open to conviction. And both
the prophet Nathan does the same in the Old [Testament], and in Matthew Christ,
saying, "What will He do to the husbandmen" [Matthew 21:40] of that vineyard?
So compelling them to give sentence themselves: for this is the greatest victory.
Next, when he had said, "For if the word which was spoken by Angels was
steadfast"— he did not add, much more that by Christ: but letting this pass, he
said what is less, "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?" And
see how he makes the comparison. "For if the word which was spoken by
Angels," says he. There, "by Angels," here, "by the Lord"— and there "a word,"
but here, "salvation."
Then lest any man should say, Your sayings, O Paul, are they Christ's? He
proves their trustworthiness both from his having heard these things of Him, and
from their being now spoken by God; since not merely a voice is wafted, as in
the case of Moses, but signs are done, and facts bear witness.
6. But what is this, "For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast"? For
in the Epistle to the Galatians also he says to this effect, "Being ordained by
angels in the hand of a Mediator." [Galatians 3:19] And again, "You received a
law by the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it." [Acts 7:53] And
everywhere he says it was given by angels. Some indeed say that Moses is
signified; but without reason. For here he says Angels in the plural: and the
Angels too which he here speaks of, are those in Heaven. What then is it? Either
he means the Decalogue only (for there Moses spoke, and God answered him
[Exodus 19:19])—or that angels were present, God disposing them in order—or
that he speaks thus in regard of all things said and done in the old Covenant, as if
Angels had part in them. But how is it said in another place, "The Law was given
by Moses" [John 1:17], and here "by Angels"? For it is said, "And God came