both as its preamble, and as subsequent to it, as signifying some
perfection in it, so also in the same way there exists a kind of
comparison between "likeness" and "image." For the good is a
preamble to man, inasmuch as man is an individual good; and,
again, the good is subsequent to man, inasmuch as we may say of a
certain man that he is good, by reason of his perfect virtue. In like
manner, likeness may be considered in the light of a preamble to
image, inasmuch as it is something more general than image, as we
have said above (Article 1): and, again, it may be considered as
subsequent to image, inasmuch as it signifies a certain perfection of
image. For we say that an image is like or unlike what it represents,
according as the representation is perfect or imperfect. Thus
likeness may be distinguished from image in two ways: first as its
preamble and existing in more things, and in this sense likeness
regards things which are more common than the intellectual
properties, wherein the image is properly to be seen. In this sense it
is stated (Questions. 83, qu. 51) that "the spirit" (namely, the mind)
without doubt was made to the image of God. "But the other parts of
man," belonging to the soul's inferior faculties, or even to the body,
"are in the opinion of some made to God's likeness." In this sense he
says (De Quant. Animae ii) that the likeness of God is found in the
soul's incorruptibility; for corruptible and incorruptible are
differences of universal beings. But likeness may be considered in
another way, as signifying the expression and perfection of the
image. In this sense Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 12) that the
image implies "an intelligent being, endowed with free-will and selfmovement, whereas likeness implies a likeness of power, as far as
this may be possible in man." In the same sense "likeness" is said to
belong to "the love of virtue": for there is no virtue without love of
virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: "Likeness" is not distinct from "image" in the
general notion of "likeness" (for thus it is included in "image"); but
so far as any "likeness" falls short of "image," or again, as it perfects
the idea of "image."
Reply to Objection 2: The soul's essence belongs to the "image," as
representing the Divine Essence in those things which belong to the
intellectual nature; but not in those conditions subsequent to general
notions of being, such as simplicity and indissolubility.
Reply to Objection 3: Even certain virtues are natural to the soul, at
least, in their seeds, by reason of which we may say that a natural

"likeness" exists in the soul. Nor it is unfitting to us the term "image"
from one point of view and from another the term "likeness."
Reply to Objection 4: Love of the word, which is knowledge loved,
belongs to the nature of "image"; but love of virtue belongs to
"likeness," as virtue itself belongs to likeness.