FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.2.

"vice": because the vice of a thing seems to consist in its not being
disposed in a way befitting its nature: hence Augustine says (De Lib.
Arb. iii): "Whatever is lacking for a thing's natural perfection may be
called a vice."
Reply to Objection 1: These three things are contrary to virtue, but
not in the same respect: for sin is opposed to virtue, according as
the latter is productive of a good work; malice, according as virtue is
a kind of goodness; while vice is opposed to virtue properly as such.
Reply to Objection 2: Virtue implies not only perfection of power, the
principle of action; but also the due disposition of its subject. The
reason for this is because a thing operates according as it is in act:
so that a thing needs to be well disposed if it has to produce a good
work. It is in this respect that vice is contrary to virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: As Cicero says (De Quaest. Tusc. iv), "disease
and sickness are vicious qualities," for in speaking of the body "he
calls it" disease "when the whole body is infected," for instance, with
fever or the like; he calls it sickness "when the disease is attended
with weakness"; and vice "when the parts of the body are not well
compacted together." And although at times there may be disease in
the body without sickness, for instance, when a man has a hidden
complaint without being hindered outwardly from his wonted
occupations; "yet, in the soul," as he says, "these two things are
indistinguishable, except in thought." For whenever a man is illdisposed inwardly, through some inordinate affection, he is rendered
thereby unfit for fulfilling his duties: since "a tree is known by its
fruit," i.e. man by his works, according to Mt. 12:33. But "vice of the
soul," as Cicero says (De Quaest. Tusc. iv), "is a habit or affection of
the soul discordant and inconsistent with itself through life": and
this is to be found even without disease and sickness, e.g. when a
man sins from weakness or passion. Consequently vice is of wider
extent than sickness or disease; even as virtue extends to more
things than health; for health itself is reckoned a kind of virtue (Phys.
vii, text. 17). Consequently vice is reckoned as contrary to virtue,
more fittingly than sickness or disease.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether vice is contrary to nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that vice is not contrary to nature.
Because vice is contrary to virtue, as stated above (Article 1). Now
virtue is in us, not by nature but by infusion or habituation, as stated
above (Question 63, Articles 1,2,3). Therefore vice is not contrary to
nature.
Objection 2: Further, it is impossible to become habituated to that
which is contrary to nature: thus "a stone never becomes habituated
to upward movement" (Ethic. ii, 1). But some men become
habituated to vice. Therefore vice is not contrary to nature.
Objection 3: Further, anything contrary to a nature, is not found in
the greater number of individuals possessed of that nature. Now vice
is found in the greater number of men; for it is written (Mt. 7:13):
"Broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there are
who go in thereat." Therefore vice is not contrary to nature.
Objection 4: Further, sin is compared to vice, as act to habit, as
stated above (Article 1). Now sin is defined as "a word, deed, or
desire, contrary to the Law of God," as Augustine shows (Contra
Faust. xxii, 27). But the Law of God is above nature. Therefore we
should say that vice is contrary to the Law, rather than to nature.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. iii, 13): "Every vice,
simply because it is a vice, is contrary to nature."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), vice is contrary to virtue.
Now the virtue of a thing consists in its being well disposed in a
manner befitting its nature, as stated above (Article 1). Hence the
vice of any thing consists in its being disposed in a manner not
befitting its nature, and for this reason is that thing "vituperated,"
which word is derived from "vice" according to Augustine (De Lib.
Arb. iii, 14).
But it must be observed that the nature of a thing is chiefly the form
from which that thing derives its species. Now man derives his
species from his rational soul: and consequently whatever is
contrary to the order of reason is, properly speaking, contrary to the
nature of man, as man; while whatever is in accord with reason, is in