FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.5.

connected with it. I say, then, that as to the very essence of
happiness, it is impossible for it to consist in an act of the will. For it
is evident from what has been said (Articles 1,2; Question 2, Article
7) that happiness is the attainment of the last end. But the attainment
of the end does not consist in the very act of the will. For the will is
directed to the end, both absent, when it desires it; and present,
when it is delighted by resting therein. Now it is evident that the
desire itself of the end is not the attainment of the end, but is a
movement towards the end: while delight comes to the will from the
end being present; and not conversely, is a thing made present, by
the fact that the will delights in it. Therefore, that the end be present
to him who desires it, must be due to something else than an act of
the will.
This is evidently the case in regard to sensible ends. For if the
acquisition of money were through an act of the will, the covetous
man would have it from the very moment that he wished for it. But at
the moment it is far from him; and he attains it, by grasping it in his
hand, or in some like manner; and then he delights in the money got.
And so it is with an intelligible end. For at first we desire to attain an
intelligible end; we attain it, through its being made present to us by
an act of the intellect; and then the delighted will rests in the end
when attained.
So, therefore, the essence of happiness consists in an act of the
intellect: but the delight that results from happiness pertains to the
will. In this sense Augustine says (Confess. x, 23) that happiness is
"joy in truth," because, to wit, joy itself is the consummation of
happiness.
Reply to Objection 1: Peace pertains to man's last end, not as though
it were the very essence of happiness; but because it is antecedent
and consequent thereto: antecedent, in so far as all those things are
removed which disturb and hinder man in attaining the last end:
consequent inasmuch as when man has attained his last end, he
remains at peace, his desire being at rest.
Reply to Objection 2: The will's first object is not its act: just as
neither is the first object of the sight, vision, but a visible thing.
Wherefore, from the very fact that happiness belongs to the will, as
the will's first object, it follows that it does not belong to it as its act.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.5.

Reply to Objection 3: The intellect apprehends the end before the will
does: yet motion towards the end begins in the will. And therefore to
the will belongs that which last of all follows the attainment of the
end, viz. delight or enjoyment.
Reply to Objection 4: Love ranks above knowledge in moving, but
knowledge precedes love in attaining: for "naught is loved save what
is known," as Augustine says (De Trin. x, 1). Consequently we first
attain an intelligible end by an act of the intellect; just as we first
attain a sensible end by an act of sense.
Reply to Objection 5: He who has whatever he desires, is happy,
because he has what he desires: and this indeed is by something
other than the act of his will. But to desire nothing amiss is needed
for happiness, as a necessary disposition thereto. And a good will is
reckoned among the good things which make a man happy,
forasmuch as it is an inclination of the will: just as a movement is
reduced to the genus of its terminus, for instance, "alteration" to the
genus "quality."