I say, if you intend to pry curiously into all His doings, what shall God have
more than men? And yet even of men there are many about whom we do not so
enquire. Much more then ought we to abstain from impertinent inquiry about the
wisdom of God, and from demanding accounts of it: in the first place, because
He is trustworthy who affirms: in the second place, because the matter admits
not investigation by reasonings. For God is not so abjectly poor as to work such
things only as can be apprehended by the weakness of your reasonings. And if
you comprehend not the work of an artisan, much less of God, the best of
artificers. Disbelieve not then the Resurrection, for very far will you be from the
hope of that which is to come.
But what is the wise argument of the gain-sayers; rather, I should say, their
exceeding senseless one? "Why how, when the body is mixed up with the earth
and has become earth, and this again is removed elsewhere, how," say they,
"shall it rise again?" To you this seems impossible, but not to the unsleeping
Eye. For unto that all things are clear. And thou in that confusion see no
distinction of parts; but He knows them all. Since also the heart of your neighbor
you know not, nor the things in it; but He knows all. If then, because of your not
knowing how God raises men up, you believe not that He does raise them, will
you disbelieve that He knows also what is in your mind? For neither is that
obvious to view. And yet in the body it is visible matter, though it be dissolved:
but those thoughts are invisible. Shall He then who knows with all certainty the
invisible things, not see the things which be visible, and easily distinguish the
scattered parts of the body? I suppose this is plain to every one.
Do not then disbelieve the Resurrection; for this is a doctrine of the Devil.
This is what the Devil is earnest for, not only that the Resurrection may be
disbelieved, but good works also may be done away with. For the man who does
not expect that he shall rise again and give an account of the things which he has
done, will not quickly apply himself to virtue; will in turn come to disbelieve the
Resurrection entirely: for both these are established by each other; vice by
unbelief, and unbelief by vice. For the conscience filled with many

wickednesses, fearing and trembling for the recompense to come and not willing
to provide itself with comfort by changing to what is most excellent, is fain to
repose in unbelief. Thus when you deny resurrection and judgment, the other for
his part will say, "Then shall I also not have to render account of my bold
deeds."
4. But why says Christ? [Matthew 22:29] "You do err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God." For God would not have wrought so many
things, had He intended not to raise us up again, but to dissolve and blot us out
in annihilation. He would not have spread out this heaven, He would not have
stretched the earth beneath, He would not have made all the rest of the universe
only for this short life. But if all these are for the present, what will He not do for
that which is to come? If, on the contrary, there is to be no future life, we are in
this respect of far meaner account than the things which have been made for our
sakes. For both the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and the rivers, are more
lasting than we are: and some even of the brutes; since the raven, and the race of
elephants, and many other creatures, have a longer enjoyment of the present life.
To us, moreover, life is both short and toilsome, but not to them. Theirs is both
long, and freer from grief and cares.
"What then? Tell me: has he made the slaves better than the masters?" Do
not, I beseech you, do not reason thus, O man, nor be so poverty-stricken in
mind, nor be ignorant of the riches of God, having such a Master. For even from
the beginning God desired to make you immortal, but thou were not willing.
Since the things also of that time were dark hints of immortality: the converse
with God; the absence of uneasiness from life; the freedom from grief, and cares,
and toils, and other things which belong to a temporary existence. For Adam had
no need either of a garment or a shelter, or any other provision of this sort; but
rather was like to the Angels; and many of the things to come he foreknew, and
was filled with great wisdom. Even what God did in secret, he knew, I mean
with regard to the woman: wherefore also he said, "This is now bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh." [Genesis 2:23] Labor came into being afterwards: so did