they may indeed be called virtues in so far as they confer aptness for
a good work, viz. the consideration of truth (since this is the good
work of the intellect): yet they are not called virtues in the second
way, as though they conferred the right use of a power or habit. For
if a man possess a habit of speculative science, it does not follow
that he is inclined to make use of it, but he is made able to consider
the truth in those matters of which he has scientific knowledge: that
he make use of the knowledge which he has, is due to the motion of
his will. Consequently a virtue which perfects the will, as charity or
justice, confers the right use of these speculative habits. And in this
way too there can be merit in the acts of these habits, if they be done
out of charity: thus Gregory says (Moral. vi) that the "contemplative
life has greater merit than the active life."
Reply to Objection 1: Work is of two kinds, exterior and interior.
Accordingly the practical or active faculty which is contrasted with
the speculative faculty, is concerned with exterior work, to which the
speculative habit is not ordained. Yet it is ordained to the interior act
of the intellect which is to consider the truth. And in this way it is an
operative habit.
Reply to Objection 2: Virtue is about certain things in two ways. In
the first place a virtue is about its object. And thus these speculative
virtues are not about those things whereby man is made happy;
except perhaps, in so far as the word "whereby" indicates the
efficient cause or object of complete happiness, i.e. God, Who is the
supreme object of contemplation. Secondly, a virtue is said to be
about its acts: and in this sense the intellectual virtues are about
those things whereby a man is made happy; both because the acts
of these virtues can be meritorious, as stated above, and because
they are a kind of beginning of perfect bliss, which consists in the
contemplation of truth, as we have already stated (Question 3, Article
7).
Reply to Objection 3: Science is contrasted with virtue taken in the
second sense, wherein it belongs to the appetitive faculty.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are only three habits of the

speculative intellect, viz. wisdom, science and
understanding?
Objection 1: It would seem unfitting to distinguish three virtues of
the speculative intellect, viz. wisdom, science and understanding.
Because a species is a kind of science, as stated in Ethic. vi, 7.
Therefore wisdom should not be condivided with science among the
intellectual virtues.
Objection 2: Further, in differentiating powers, habits and acts in
respect of their objects, we consider chiefly the formal aspect of
these objects, as we have already explained (FP, Question 77, Article
3). Therefore diversity of habits is taken, not from their material
objects, but from the formal aspect of those objects. Now the
principle of a demonstration is the formal aspect under which the
conclusion is known. Therefore the understanding of principles
should not be set down as a habit or virtue distinct from the
knowledge of conclusions.
Objection 3: Further, an intellectual virtue is one which resides in the
essentially rational faculty. Now even the speculative reason
employs the dialectic syllogism for the sake of argument, just as it
employs the demonstrative syllogism. Therefore as science, which is
the result of a demonstrative syllogism, is set down as an intellectual
virtue, so also should opinion be.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 1) reckons these three
alone as being intellectual virtues, viz. wisdom, science and
understanding.
I answer that, As already stated (Article 1), the virtues of the
speculative intellect are those which perfect the speculative intellect
for the consideration of truth: for this is its good work. Now a truth is
subject to a twofold consideration---as known in itself, and as known
through another. What is known in itself, is as a "principle," and is at
once understood by the intellect: wherefore the habit that perfects
the intellect for the consideration of such truth is called
"understanding," which is the habit of principles.
On the other hand, a truth which is known through another, is