potentiality with regard to place, though not to being, and that its
form is a separate substance united to it as its motive force. For it is
impossible to suppose any being in act, unless in its totality it be act
and form, or be something which has act or form. Setting aside,
then, in thought, the separate substance stated to be endowed with
motive power, if the heavenly body is not something having form--that is, something composed of a form and the subject of that form--it follows that in its totality it is form and act. But every such thing is
something actually understood, which the heavenly bodies are not,
being sensible. It follows, then, that the matter of the heavenly
bodies, considered in itself, is in potentiality to that form alone which
it actually possesses. Nor does it concern the point at issue to
inquire whether this is a soul or any other thing. Hence this form
perfects this matter in such a way that there remains in it no
potentiality with respect to being, but only to place, as Aristotle [De
Coelo i, text. 20] says. So, then, the matter of the heavenly bodies
and of the elements is not the same, except by analogy, in so far as
they agree in the character of potentiality.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine follows in this the opinion of Plato,
who does not admit a fifth essence. Or we may say that formless
matter is one with the unity of order, as all bodies are one in the
order of corporeal creatures.
Reply to Objection 2: If genus is taken in a physical sense,
corruptible and incorruptible things are not in the same genus, on
account of their different modes of potentiality, as is said in Metaph.
x, text. 26. Logically considered, however, there is but one genus of
all bodies, since they are all included in the one notion of corporeity.
Reply to Objection 3: The form of corporeity is not one and the same
in all bodies, being no other than the various forms by which bodies
are distinguished, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 4: As potentiality is directed towards act,
potential beings are differentiated by their different acts, as sight is
by color, hearing by sound. Therefore for this reason the matter of
the celestial bodies is different from that of the elemental, because
the matter of the celestial is not in potentiality to an elemental form.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the empyrean heaven was created at the

same time as formless matter?
Objection 1: It would seem that the empyrean heaven was not
created at the same time as formless matter. For the empyrean, if it
is anything at all, must be a sensible body. But all sensible bodies
are movable, and the empyrean heaven is not movable. For if it were
so, its movement would be ascertained by the movement of some
visible body, which is not the case. The empyrean heaven, then, was
not created contemporaneously with formless matter.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 4) that "the lower
bodies are governed by the higher in a certain order." If, therefore,
the empyrean heaven is the highest of bodies, it must necessarily
exercise some influence on bodies below it. But this does not seem
to be the case, especially as it is presumed to be without movement;
for one body cannot move another unless itself also be moved.
Therefore the empyrean heaven was not created together with
formless matter.
Objection 3: Further, if it is held that the empyrean heaven is the
place of contemplation, and not ordained to natural effects; on the
contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iv, 20): "In so far as we mentally
apprehend eternal things, so far are we not of this world"; from
which it is clear that contemplation lifts the mind above the things of
this world. Corporeal place, therefore, cannot be the seat of
contemplation.
Objection 4: Further, among the heavenly bodies exists a body,
partly transparent and partly luminous, which we call the sidereal
heaven. There exists also a heaven wholly transparent, called by
some the aqueous or crystalline heaven. If, then, there exists a still
higher heaven, it must be wholly luminous. But this cannot be, for
then the air would be constantly illuminated, and there would be no
night. Therefore the empyrean heaven was not created together with
formless matter.
On the contrary, Strabus says that in the passage, "In the beginning
God created heaven and earth," heaven denotes not the visible
firmament, but the empyrean or fiery heaven.