its very nature is united to matter as its act. Nor is there any other
cause of union except the agent, which causes matter to be in act, as
the Philosopher says, Metaph. viii (Did. vii, 6).
From this it is clear how false are the opinions of those who
maintained the existence of some mediate bodies between the soul
and body of man. Of these certain Platonists said that the intellectual
soul has an incorruptible body naturally united to it, from which it is
never separated, and by means of which it is united to the
corruptible body of man. Others said that the soul is united to the
body by means of a corporeal spirit. Others said it is united to the
body by means of light, which, they say, is a body and of the nature
of the fifth essence; so that the vegetative soul would be united to
the body by means of the light of the sidereal heaven; the sensible
soul, by means of the light of the crystal heaven; and the intellectual
soul by means of the light of the empyrean heaven. Now all this is
fictious and ridiculous: for light is not a body; and the fifth essence
does not enter materially into the composition of a mixed body
(since it is unchangeable), but only virtually: and lastly, because the
soul is immediately united to the body as the form to matter.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine speaks there of the soul as it moves
the body; whence he uses the word "administration." It is true that it
moves the grosser parts of the body by the more subtle parts. And
the first instrument of the motive power is a kind of spirit, as the
Philosopher says in De causa motus animalium (De mot. animal. x).
Reply to Objection 2: The union of soul and body ceases at the
cessation of breath, not because this is the means of union, but
because of the removal of that disposition by which the body is
disposed for such a union. Nevertheless the breath is a means of
moving, as the first instrument of motion.
Reply to Objection 3: The soul is indeed very distant from the body,
if we consider the condition of each separately: so that if each had a
separate existence, many means of connection would have to
intervene. But inasmuch as the soul is the form of the body, it has
not an existence apart from the existence of the body, but by its own
existence is united to the body immediately. This is the case with
every form which, if considered as an act, is very distant from
matter, which is a being only in potentiality.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the soul is in each part of the body?

Objection 1: It would seem that the whole soul is not in each part of
the body; for the Philosopher says in De causa motus animalium (De
mot. animal. x): "It is not necessary for the soul to be in each part of
the body; it suffices that it be in some principle of the body causing
the other parts to live, for each part has a natural movement of its
own."
Objection 2: Further, the soul is in the body of which it is the act. But
it is the act of an organic body. Therefore it exists only in an organic
body. But each part of the human body is not an organic body.
Therefore the whole soul is not in each part.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (De Anima. ii, 1) that the
relation of a part of the soul to a part of the body, such as the sight
to the pupil of the eye, is the same as the relation of the soul to the
whole body of an animal. If, therefore, the whole soul is in each part
of the body, it follows that each part of the body is an animal.
Objection 4: Further, all the powers of the soul are rooted in the
essence of the soul. If, therefore, the whole soul be in each part of
the body, it follows that all the powers of the soul are in each part of
the body; thus the sight will be in the ear, and hearing in the eye, and
this is absurd.
Objection 5: Further, if the whole soul is in each part of the body,
each part of the body is immediately dependent on the soul. Thus
one part would not depend on another; nor would one part be nobler
than another; which is clearly untrue. Therefore the soul is not in
each part of the body.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 6), that "in each body
the whole soul is in the whole body, and in each part is entire."
I answer that, As we have said, if the soul were united to the body
merely as its motor, we might say that it is not in each part of the
body, but only in one part through which it would move the others.
But since the soul is united to the body as its form, it must
necessarily be in the whole body, and in each part thereof. For it is
not an accidental form, but the substantial form of the body. Now the