strong enough to reclaim them. For he says, "we know that all things work
together for good to them that love God." Now when he speaks of "all things,"
he mentions even the things that seem painful. For should even tribulation, or
poverty, or imprisonment, or famines, or deaths, or anything else whatsoever
come upon us, God is able to change all these things into the opposite. For this is
quite an instance of His unspeakable power, His making things seemingly
painful to be lightsome to us, and turning them into that which is helpful to us.
And so he does not say, that "them that love God," no grievance approaches, but,
that it "works together for good," that is to say, that He uses the grievous things
themselves to make the persons so plotted against approved. And this is a much
greater thing than hindering the approach of such grievances, or stopping them
when they have come. And this is what He did even with the furnace at Babylon.
For He did not either prevent their falling into it, or extinguish the flame after
those saints were cast into it, but let it burn on, and made them by this very
flame greater objects of wonder, and with the Apostles too He wrought other like
wonders continually. [Mark 16:18] For if men who have learned to be
philosophic can use the things of nature to the opposite of their intention, and
appear even when living in poverty in easier circumstances than the rich, and
shine through disgrace: much more will God work for those that love Him both
these and also greater things by far. For one needs only one thing, a genuine love
of Him, and all things follow that. As then things seemingly harmful do good to
these, so do even things profitable harm those who love Him not. For instance,
the exhibition of miracles and wisdom in His teaching only injured the Jews, as
did the rightness of doctrine; and for the former they called Him a possessed
person [John 8:48], for the other one that would be equal to God [John 5:18]:
and because of the miracles (ib. 11:47, 53), they even went about to kill Him.
But the thief when crucified, when nailed to the Cross, and reviled, and suffering
ills unnumbered, not only was not hurt, but even gained the greatest good
therefrom. See how for those who love God all things work together for good.
After mentioning then this great blessing, one which far exceeds man's nature,

since to many this seemed even past belief, he draws a proof of it from past
blessings, in these words, "to them who are called according to His purpose."
Now consider, he means, from the calling, for instance, what I have just said.
Why then did He not from the first call all? Or why not Paul himself as soon as
the rest? Does it not seem that the deferring was harmful? But it was still by the
event shown to be for the best. The purpose he here mentions, however, that he
might not ascribe everything to the calling; since in this way both Greeks and
Jews would be sure to cavil. For if the calling alone were sufficient, how came it
that all were not saved? Hence he says, that it is not the calling alone, but the
purpose of those called too, that works the salvation. For the calling was not
forced upon them, nor compulsory. All then were called, but all did not obey the
call.
Ver. 29. "For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of His Son."
See what superb honor! For what the Only-begotten was by Nature, this
they also have become by grace. And still he was not satisfied with this calling
of them conformed thereto, but even adds another point, "that He might be the
first-born." And even here he does not come to a pause, but again after this he
proceeds to mention another point, "Among many brethren." So wishing to use
all means of setting the relationship in a clear light. Now all these things you are
to take as said of the Incarnation. For according to the Godhead He is Onlybegotten. See, what great things He has given unto us! Doubt not then about the
future. For he shows even upon other grounds His concern for us by saying, that
things were fore-ordered in this way from the beginning. For men have to derive
from things their conceptions about them, but to God these things have been
long determined upon, and from of old He bare good-will toward us ([πρὸς ἡμἅς
διέκειτο]), he says.
Ver. 30. "Moreover whom He did predestinate, them He also called; and
whom He called, them He also justified."
Now He justified them by the regeneration of the laver. "And whom He