SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.13.

womb, for so long as man has not the use of reason, he differs not
from an irrational animal; so that even as an ox or a horse belongs to
someone who, according to the civil law, can use them when he
likes, as his own instrument, so, according to the natural law, a son,
before coming to the use of reason, is under his father's care. Hence
it would be contrary to natural justice, if a child, before coming to the
use of reason, were to be taken away from its parents' custody, or
anything done to it against its parents' wish. As soon, however, as it
begins to have the use of its free-will, it begins to belong to itself,
and is able to look after itself, in matters concerning the Divine or the
natural law, and then it should be induced, not by compulsion but by
persuasion, to embrace the faith: it can then consent to the faith, and
be baptized, even against its parents' wish; but not before it comes
to the use of reason. Hence it is said of the children of the fathers of
old that they were saved in the faith of their parents; whereby we are
given to understand that it is the parents' duty to look after the
salvation of their children, especially before they come to the use of
reason.
Reply to Objection 1: In the marriage bond, both husband and wife
have the use of the free-will, and each can assent to the faith without
the other's consent. But this does not apply to a child before it
comes to the use of reason: yet the comparison holds good after the
child has come to the use of reason, if it is willing to be converted.
Reply to Objection 2: No one should be snatched from natural death
against the order of civil law: for instance, if a man were condemned
by the judge to temporal death, nobody ought to rescue him by
violence: hence no one ought to break the order of the natural law,
whereby a child is in the custody of its father, in order to rescue it
from the danger of everlasting death.
Reply to Objection 3: Jews are bondsmen of princes by civil
bondage, which does not exclude the order of natural or Divine law.
Reply to Objection 4: Man is directed to God by his reason, whereby
he can know Him. Hence a child before coming to the use of reason,
in the natural order of things, is directed to God by its parents'
reason, under whose care it lies by nature: and it is for them to
dispose of the child in all matters relating to God.
Reply to Objection 5: The peril that ensues from the omission of

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.13.

preaching, threatens only those who are entrusted with the duty of
preaching. Hence it had already been said (Ezech. 3:17): "I have
made thee a watchman to the children of Israel." On the other hand,
to provide the sacraments of salvation for the children of unbelievers
is the duty of their parents. Hence it is they whom the danger
threatens, if through being deprived of the sacraments their children
fail to obtain salvation.