like a noble champion continually giving blows to it, reaps the best of pleasures,
and sweeter than ten thousand of that kind; and this victory and his good
conscience, and those illustrous trophies, are ornaments for him continually to
deck himself withal.
As to the other, if after his intercourse he has a little respite, it must be
counted nothing. For again the storm comes on, and again there are waves. But
he that commands himself does not suffer this tumult to lay hold of him at all,
nor the sea to arise, nor the wild beast to roar. And even if he endure some
violence in restraining such an impulse, yet so does the other also, continually
receiving blows and stabs, and unable to endure the sting: and it is like as if there
were a wild horse furious and struggling, and one should check with the bridle,
and hold him in with all skill: while another giving him the rein to escape the
trouble, were dragged along by him and carried hither and there.
If I have spoken these things more plainly than is becoming, let no man
blame me. For I desire not to make a brave show by a gravity of words, but to
make my hearers grave.
Therefore also the prophets spare no such words, wishing to extirpate the
licentiousness of the Jews, but do even more nakedly inveigh against them than
we do now in the things we have spoken. For so a physician wishing to remove
an ulcer does not consider how he may keep his hands clean, but how he may rid
the patient of the ulcer; and he who would raise on high the lowly, first makes
himself lowly; and he who seeks to slay the conspirator stains himself with
blood as well as the other, and this makes him the more brilliant. Since if one
were to see a soldier returning from the war, stained with gore and blood and
brains, he will not loathe him nor turn from him on this account, but will even
admire him the more. So then let us do, when we see any one returning, covered
with blood after the slaughter of his evil desire, let us the more admire him and
become partakers of his battle and victory, and say to those who indulge this
wild love, "show us the pleasure you derive from lust; for the continent has that
which comes of his victory, but thou none from any quarter. But if you should

mention that which is connected with the criminal act, yet the other is more
manifest and satisfactory. For you have from the enjoyment something brief and
hardly apparent; but he from his conscience, has both a greater and an enduring
and a sweeter joy. The company of a woman has surely no such power as selfcommand, to preserve the soul undisturbed and give it wings."
Well then: the continent man, as I said, thus evidently makes his pleasure
out to us: but in your case I see the dejection arising from defeat, but the
pleasure, desiring to see, I find not. For what do you consider the moment of
pleasure? That before the criminal action? Nay, it is not so, for it is a time of
madness and delirium and frenzy: to grind the teeth and be beside one's self is
not any pleasure: and if it were pleasure, it would not produce the same effects
on you which they who are in pain endure. For they who strike with their fists
and are stricken grind their teeth, and women in travail distracted with pains do
the same. So that this is no pleasure, but frenzy rather, and confusion, and
tumult. Shall we say then, the time after the action? Nay, neither is this. For
neither could we say that a woman just delivered is in pleasure, but in release
from certain pains. But this is by no means pleasure, but weakness rather and
falling away: and there is a great difference between these two. What then is the
time of pleasure, tell me? There is none. But if there be any, it is so brief as not
even to be apparent. At least, having zealously sought in a great many ways to
detect and apprehend it, we have not been able. But the time of the chaste man's
pleasure is not such, rather it is wider and evident to all. Or rather, all his life is
in pleasure, his conscience crowned, the waves laid, no disturbance from any
quarter arising within him.
Since then this man's life is more in pleasure, while the life spent in love of
pleasure is in dejection and disquiets; let us flee from licentiousness, let us keep
hold on continence, that we may also obtain the good things to come, through
the grace and mercy, etc., etc.