John 4:35
"Say ye not, that there are yet four months, and then comes harvest? Behold, I
say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look upon the fields, for they are white
already to harvest."
2. Behold, He again by familiar words leads them up to the consideration of
greater matters; for when He spoke of "meat," He signified nothing else than the
salvation of the men who should come to Him; and again, the "field" and the
"harvest" signify the very same thing, the multitude of souls prepared for the
reception of the preaching; and the "eyes" of which He speaks are those both of
the mind and of the body; (for they now beheld the crowd of Samaritans
advancing;) and the readiness of their will He calls, "fields already white." For as
the ears of grain, when they have become white, and are ready for reaping, so
these, He says, are prepared and fitted for salvation.
And wherefore instead of calling them "fields" and "harvest," did He not
plainly say, that "the men were coming to believe and were ready to receive the
Word, having been instructed by the Prophets; and now bringing forth fruit"?
What mean these figures used by Him? For this He does not here only, but
through all the Gospel; and the Prophets also employ the same method, saying
many things in a metaphorical manner. What then may be the cause of this? For
the grace of the Spirit did not ordain it to be so without a reason, but why and
wherefore? On two accounts; one, that the discourse may be more vivid, and
bring what is said more clearly before our eyes. For the mind when it has laid
hold on a familiar image of the matters in hand, is more aroused, and beholding
them as it were in a picture, is occupied by them to a greater degree. This is one
reason; the other is, that the statement may be sweetened, and that the memory
of what is said may be more lasting. For assertion does not subdue and bring in
an ordinary hearer so much as narration by objects, and the representation of
experience. Which one may here see most wisely effected by the parable.

John 4:36
"And he that reaps receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life eternal."
For the fruit of an earthly harvest profits not to life eternal, but to this which
is for a time; but the spiritual fruit to that which has neither age nor death. Do
you see that the expressions are of sense, but the thoughts spiritual, and that by
the very words themselves He divides things earthly from heavenly? For when in
discoursing of water He made this the peculiar property of the heavenly Water,
that "he who drinks it shall never thirst," so He does here also when He says,
"that this fruit is gathered unto eternal life."
"That both he that sows and he that reaps may rejoice together."
Who is "he that sows"? Who "he that reaps"? The Prophets are they that
sowed but they reaped not, but the Apostles. "Yet not on this account are they
deprived of the pleasure and recompense of their labors, but they rejoice and are
glad with us, although they reap not with us. For harvest is not such work as
sowing. I therefore have kept you for that in which the toil is less and the
pleasure greater, and not for sowing because in that there is much hardship and
toil. In harvest the return is large, the labor not so great; nay there is much
facility." By these arguments He here desires to prove, that "the wish of the
Prophets is, that all men should come to Me." This also the Law was engaged in
effecting; and for this they sowed, that they might produce this fruit. He shows
moreover that He sent them also, and that there was a very intimate connection
between the New Covenant and the Old, and all this He effects at once by this
parable. He makes mention also of a proverbial expression generally circulated.