he keeps reminding them of their transgressions? Before, he did it by saying,
"through the Law is the knowledge of sin;" and after by saying, "that all have
sinned," but here in yet stronger language. For he does not say for the sins, but,
"for the relaxing," that is, the deadness. For there was no longer any hope of
recovering health, but as the paralyzed body needed the hand from above, so
does the soul which has been deadened. And what is indeed worse, a thing which
he sets down as a charge, and points out that it is a greater accusation. Now what
is this? That the last state was incurred in the forbearance of God. For you
cannot plead, he means, that you have not enjoyed much forbearance and
goodness. But the words "at this time" are those of one who is pointing out the
greatness of the power (Sav. forbearance) and love toward man. For after we had
given all over, (he would say,) and it were time to sentence us, and the evils were
waxed great and the sins were in their full, then He displayed His own power,
that you might learn how great is the abundancy of righteousness with Him. For
this, had it taken place at the beginning, would not have had so wonderful and
unusual an appearance as now, when every sort of cure was found unavailing.
Ver. 27. "Where is boasting then? It is excluded," he says. "By what law? Of
works? Nay, but by the law of faith."
Paul is at great pains to show that faith is mighty to a degree which was
never even fancied of the Law. For after he had said that God justifies man by
faith, he grapples with the Law again. And he does not say, where then are the
well doings of the Jews? Where their righteous dealing? But, "where is then the
boasting?" so taking every opportunity of showing, that they do but use great
words, as though they had somewhat more than others, and have no work to
show. And after saying, "Where then is the boasting?" he does not say, it is put
out of sight and has come to an end, but "it is excluded," which word rather
expresses unseasonableness; since the reason for it is no more. For as when the
judgment has come they that would repent have not any longer the season for it,
thus now the sentence being henceforth passed, and all being upon the point of
perishing, and He being at hand Who by grace would break these terrors, they

had no longer the season for making a plea of amelioration wrought by the Law.
For if it were right to strengthen themselves upon these things, it should have
been before His coming. But now that He who should save by faith had come,
the season for those efforts was taken from them. For since all were convicted,
He therefore saves by grace. And this is why He has come but now, that they
may not say, as they would had He come at the first, that it was possible to be
saved by the Law and by our own labors and well-doings. To curb therefore this
their effrontery, He waited a long time: so that after they were by every argument
clearly convicted of inability to help themselves, He then saved them by His
grace. And for this reason too when he had said above, "To declare His
righteousness," he added, "at this time." If any then were to gainsay, they do the
same as if a person who after committing great sins was unable to defend
himself in court, but was condemned and going to be punished, and then being
by the royal pardon forgiven, should have the effrontery after his forgiveness to
boast and say that he had done no sin. For before the pardon came, was the time
to prove it: but after it came he would no longer have the season for boasting.
And this happened in the Jews' case. For since they had been traitors to
themselves, this was why He came, by His very coming doing away their
boasting. For he who says that he is a "teacher of babes, and makes his boast in
the Law," and styles himself "an instructor of the foolish," if alike with them he
needed a teacher and a Saviour, can no longer have any pretext for boasting. For
if even before this, the circumcision was made uncircumcision, much rather was
it now, since it is cast out from both periods. But after saying that "it was
excluded," he shows also, how. How then does he say it was excluded? "By what
law? Of works? Nay, but by the law of faith." See he calls the faith also a law
delighting to keep to the names, and so allay the seeming novelty. But what is
the "law of faith?" It is, being saved by grace. Here he shows God's power, in
that He has not only saved, but has even justified, and led them to boasting, and
this too without needing works, but looking for faith only. And in saying this he
attempts to bring the Jew who has believed to act with moderation, and to calm