having nothing of the kind, the rich will in consequence of this spectacle
contemn and despise the partners of their home. For when the harlot present to
the beholders garb and look, and voice and step, all luxurious, they depart set on
fire, and enter into their own houses, thenceforth captives.
Hence the insults, and the affronts, hence the enmities, the wars, the daily
deaths; hence to them that are taken captive, life is insupportable, and the partner
of their home thenceforth unpleasing, and their children not as much objects of
affection, and all things in their houses turned upside down, and after that they
seem to be thrown into disorder by the very sunbeam.
But not from these choirs does any such dissatisfaction arise, but the wife
will receive her husband quiet and meek, freed from all unlawful lust, and will
find him more gentle to her than before this. Such evil things does that choir
bring forth, but this good things, the one making wolves of sheep, this lambs of
wolves. But as yet we have perhaps said nothing hitherto touching the pleasure.
And what could be more pleasant than not to be troubled or grieved in
mind, neither to despond and groan? Nevertheless, let us carry on our discourse
still further, and examine the enjoyment of either kind of song and spectacle; and
we shall see the one indeed continuing until evening, so long as the spectator sits
in the theatre, but after this paining him more grievously than any sting; but in
the other case forever vigorous in the souls of them that have beheld it. For as
well the fashion of the men, and the delightfulness of the place, and the
sweetness of their manner of life, and the purity, of their rule, and the grace of
that most beautiful and spiritual song they have for ever instilled in them. They
at least who are in continual enjoyment of those havens, thenceforth flee as from
a tempest, from the tumults of the multitude.
But not when singing only, and praying, but also when riveted to their
books, they are a pleasing spectacle to the beholders. For after they have ended
the choir, one takes Isaiah and discourses with him, another converses with the
apostles, and another goes over the labors of other men, and seeks wisdom
concerning God, concerning this universe, concerning the things that are seen,

concerning the things that are not seen, concerning the objects of sense, and the
objects of intellect, concerning the vileness of this present life, and the greatness
of that to come.
5. And they are fed on a food most excellent, not setting before themselves
cooked flesh of beasts; but oracles of God, beyond honey and the honey comb, a
honey marvellous, and far superior to that whereon John fed of old in the
wilderness. For this honey no wild bees collect, settling on the flowers, neither
do lay it up in hives digesting the dew, but the grace of the Spirit forming it, lays
it up in the souls of the saints, in the place of honeycombs, and hives, and pipes,
so that he that will may eat thereof continually in security. These bees then they
also imitate, and hover around the honeycombs of those holy books, reaping
therefrom great pleasure.
And if you desire to learn about their table, be near it, and you shall see
them bursting forth with such things, all gentle and sweet, and full of a spiritual
fragrance. No foul word can those spiritual mouths bring forth, nothing of
foolish jesting, nothing harsh, but all worthy of Heaven. One would not be
wrong in comparing the mouths of them that crawl about in the market places,
and are mad after worldly things, to ditches of some mire; but the lips of these to
fountains flowing with honey, and pouring forth pure streams.
But if any felt displeased that I have called the mouths of the multitude
ditches of some mire, let him know that I have said it, sparing them very much.
For Scripture has not used this measure, but a comparison far stronger. "For
adder's poison," it is said, "is under their lips, and their throat is an open
sepulchre." But theirs are not so, but full of much fragrance.
And their state here is like this, but that hereafter what speech can set
before us? What thought shall conceive? The portion of angels, the blessedness
unspeakable, the good things untold?
Perchance some are warmed now, and have been moved to a longing after
this good rule of life. But what is the profit, when while you are here only, you
have this fire; but when you have gone forth, you extinguish the flame, and this