might be brought about more fitly and more surely, it was necessary
that they should be taught divine truths by divine revelation. It was
therefore necessary that besides philosophical science built up by
reason, there should be a sacred science learned through revelation.
Reply to Objection 1: Although those things which are beyond man's
knowledge may not be sought for by man through his reason,
nevertheless, once they are revealed by God, they must be accepted
by faith. Hence the sacred text continues, "For many things are
shown to thee above the understanding of man" (Ecclus. 3:25). And
in this, the sacred science consists.
Reply to Objection 2: Sciences are differentiated according to the
various means through which knowledge is obtained. For the
astronomer and the physicist both may prove the same conclusion:
that the earth, for instance, is round: the astronomer by means of
mathematics (i.e. abstracting from matter), but the physicist by
means of matter itself. Hence there is no reason why those things
which may be learned from philosophical science, so far as they can
be known by natural reason, may not also be taught us by another
science so far as they fall within revelation. Hence theology included
in sacred doctrine differs in kind from that theology which is part of
philosophy.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sacred doctrine is a science?

Objection 1: It seems that sacred doctrine is not a science. For every
science proceeds from self-evident principles. But sacred doctrine
proceeds from articles of faith which are not self-evident, since their
truth is not admitted by all: "For all men have not faith" (2 Thess.
3:2). Therefore sacred doctrine is not a science.
Objection 2: Further, no science deals with individual facts. But this
sacred science treats of individual facts, such as the deeds of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and such like. Therefore sacred doctrine
is not a science.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1) "to this science
alone belongs that whereby saving faith is begotten, nourished,
protected and strengthened." But this can be said of no science
except sacred doctrine. Therefore sacred doctrine is a science.
I answer that, Sacred doctrine is a science. We must bear in mind
that there are two kinds of sciences. There are some which proceed
from a principle known by the natural light of intelligence, such as
arithmetic and geometry and the like. There are some which proceed
from principles known by the light of a higher science: thus the
science of perspective proceeds from principles established by
geometry, and music from principles established by arithmetic. So it
is that sacred doctrine is a science because it proceeds from
principles established by the light of a higher science, namely, the
science of God and the blessed. Hence, just as the musician accepts
on authority the principles taught him by the mathematician, so
sacred science is established on principles revealed by God.
Reply to Objection 1: The principles of any science are either in
themselves self-evident, or reducible to the conclusions of a higher
science; and such, as we have said, are the principles of sacred
doctrine.
Reply to Objection 2: Individual facts are treated of in sacred
doctrine, not because it is concerned with them principally, but they
are introduced rather both as examples to be followed in our lives
(as in moral sciences) and in order to establish the authority of those
men through whom the divine revelation, on which this sacred