7. Habitually in Holy Scripture the language of human passion is applied to God (B. I,
Chapp.LXXXIX-LXCI). Thus it is said: The Lord was angered in fury against
his people (Ps. cv, 40): for He punishes, as men in anger do: hence it is added: And
gave them over into the hands of the Gentiles. So in the text, Sadden not the Holy Spirit
of God (Eph. iv, 30), the Holy Ghost is said to be saddened, because He abandons
sinners; as men, when they are saddened and annoyed, forsake the company of them
that annoy them.
8. Another customary phraseology of Holy Scripture is the attributing of that to God,
which He produces in man. So it is said: The Spirit himself asketh for us with
unspeakable groanings (Rom. viii, 26): because He makes us ask, for He produces in
our hearts the love of God, whereby we desire to enjoy Him and ask according to our
desire.
9. Since the Holy Ghost proceeds as the love wherewith God loves Himself; and since
God loves with the same love Himself and other beings for the sake of His own
goodness (B. I Chapp.LXXV,LXXVI); it is clear that the love wherewith God
loves us belongs to the Holy Ghost. In like manner also the love wherewith we love
God. In respect of both these loves the Holy Ghost is well said to be given. In respect of
the love wherewith God loves us, He may be said to be given, in the sense in which one
is said to give his love to another, when he begins to love him. Only, be it observed,
there is no beginning in time for God's love of any one, if we regard the act of divine will
loving us; but the effect of His love is caused in time in the creature whom He draws to
Himself. Again, in respect of the love wherewith we love God, the Holy Ghost may be
said to be given us, because this love is produced in us by the Holy Ghost, who by
reason of this love dwells in us, and so we possess Him and enjoy His support. And
since the Holy Ghost has it of the Father and the Son that He is in us and is possessed
by us, therefore He is aptly said to be given us by the Father and the Son. Your Father
from heaven will give the good Spirit to them that ask him (Luke xi, 13; cf. Acts v, 32:
John xv, 26). Nor does this argue Him to be less than the Father and the Son, but only
to have His origin from them.
11. It is reasonable that in the case of the divine nature alone nature should be
communicated in more modes than the one mode of generation. In God alone act and
being are identical: hence since there is in God, as in every intelligent nature, both
intelligence and will, alike that which proceeds in Him as intelligence, to wit, the Word,
and that proceeds in Him as love and will, to wit, Love, must have divine being and be
God; thus as well the Son as the Holy Ghost is true God.

Church down to the present day is a continuation of that visible mission of the Spirit,
who abides with the Church for ever (John xiv, 16), animating and informing the body of
the Church, and who in that body is still made manifest to the world, after the
miraculous charismata have ceased, and the appearances of the Baptismal Dove and
the Pentecostal Fire have become events of remote antiquity.