principle of alteration in virtue of its local movement, and all other
secondary agents act in virtue thereof and as though moved thereby,
it follows that at the cessation of the heavenly movement there is no
longer any agent that can change the body by altering it from its
natural property. Wherefore after the resurrection, and the cessation
of the heavenly movement, there will be no quality capable of
altering the human body from its natural quality. Now corruption, like
generation, is the term of alteration. Hence the bodies of the damned
will be incorruptible, and this will serve the purpose of Divine justice,
since living for ever they will be punished for ever. This is in keeping
with the demands of Divine justice, as we shall state further on
(Article 3), even as now the corruptibility of bodies serves the
purpose of Divine providence, by which through the corruption of
one thing another is generated.
Secondly, this happens through the principle of corruption being
hindered, and in this way the body of Adam was incorruptible,
because the conflicting qualities that exist in man's body were
withheld by the grace of innocence from conducing to the body's
dissolution: and much more will they be withheld in the glorified
bodies, which will be wholly subject to the spirit. Thus after the
general resurrection the two aforesaid modes of incorruptibility will
be united together in the bodies of the blessed.
Reply to Objection 1: The contraries of which bodies are composed
are conducive to corruption as secondary principles. For the first
active principle thereof is the heavenly movement: wherefore given
the movement of the heaven, it is necessary for a body composed of
contraries to be corrupted unless some more powerful cause
prevent it: whereas if the heavenly movement be withdrawn, the
contraries of which a body is composed do not suffice to cause
corruption, even in accordance with nature, as explained above. But
the philosophers were ignorant of a cessation in the heavenly
movement; and consequently they held that a body composed of
contraries is without fail corrupted in accordance with nature.
Reply to Objection 2: This incorruptibility will result from nature, not
as though there were some principle of incorruption in the bodies of
the damned, but on account of the cessation of the active principle
of corruption, as shown above.
Reply to Objection 3: Although death is simply the greatest of
punishments, yet nothing prevents death conducing, in a certain

respect, to a cessation of punishments; and consequently the
removal of death may contribute to the increase of punishment. For
as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 9), "Life is pleasant to all, for all
desire to be . . . But we must not apply this to a wicked or corrupt
life, nor one passed in sorrow." Accordingly just as life is simply
pleasant, but not the life that is passed in sorrows, so too death,
which is the privation of life, is painful simply, and the greatest of
punishments, inasmuch as it deprives one of the primary good,
namely being, with which other things are withdrawn. But in so far as
it deprives one of a wicked life, and of such as is passed in sorrow, it
is a remedy for pains, since it puts an end to them. and consequently
the withdrawal of death leads to the increase of punishments by
making them everlasting. If however we say that death is penal by
reason of the bodily pain which the dying feel, without doubt the
damned will continue to feel a far greater pain: wherefore they are
said to be in "everlasting death," according to the Psalm (48:15):
"Death shall feed upon them."