ten thousand sins? Notwithstanding, God delivered you from all those and
counted you worthy of such a Table: but you are not even thus become more
merciful: therefore of course nothing else remains but that you should be
"delivered to the tormentors."
7. These words let us also listen to, all of us, as many as in this place
approach with the poor to this holy Table, but when we go out, do not seem even
to have seen them, but are both drunken and pass heedlessly by the hungry; the
very things whereof the Corinthians were accused. And when is this done? Say
you. At all times indeed, but especially at the festivals, where above all times it
ought not so to be. Is it not so, that at such times, immediately after Communion,
drunkenness succeeds and contempt of the poor? And having partaken of the
Blood, when it were a time for you to fast and watch, you give yourself up to
wine and revelling. And yet if you have by chance made your morning meal on
any thing good, you keep yourself lest by any other unsavory viand thou spoil
the taste of the former: and now that you have been feasting on the Spirit you
bring in a satanical luxury. Consider, when the Apostles partook of that holy
Supper, what they did: did they not betake themselves to prayers and singing of
hymns? To sacred vigils? To that long work of teaching, so full of all self-denial?
For then He related and delivered to them those great and wonderful things,
when Judas had gone out to call them who were about to crucify Him. Have you
not heard how the three thousand also who partook of the Communion continued
even in prayer and teaching, not in drunken feasts and revellings? But thou
before you have partaken fastest, that in a certain way you may appear worthy of
the Communion: but when you have partaken, and you ought to increase your
temperance, you undo all. And yet surely it is not the same to fast before this and
after it. Since although it is our duty to be temperate at both times, yet most
particularly after we have received the Bridegroom. Before, that you may
become worthy of receiving: after, that you may not be found unworthy of what
you have received.
"What then? Ought we to fast after receiving?" I say not this, neither do I

use any compulsion. This indeed were well: however, I do not enforce this, but I
exhort you not to feast to excess. For if one never ought to live luxuriously, and
Paul showed this when he said, "she that gives herself to pleasure is dead while
she lives" [1 Timothy 5:6]; much more will she then be dead. And if luxury be
death to a woman, much more to a man: and if this done at another time is fatal,
much more after the communion of the Mysteries. And do you having taken the
bread of life, do an action of death and not shudder? Do you not know how great
evils are brought in by luxury? Unseasonable laughter, disorderly expressions,
buffoonery fraught with perdition, unprofitable trifling, all the other things,
which it is not seemly even to name. And these things you do when you have
enjoyed the Table of Christ, on that day on which you have been counted worthy
to touch His flesh with your tongue. What then is to be done to prevent these
things? Purify your right hand, your tongue, your lips, which have become a
threshold for Christ to tread upon. Consider the time in which you drew near and
set forth a material table, raise your mind to that Table, to the Supper of the
Lord, to the vigil of the disciples, in that night, that holy night. Nay, rather
should one accurately examine, this very present state is night. Let us watch then
with the Lord, let us be pricked in our hearts with the disciples. It is the season
of prayers, not of drunkenness; ever indeed, but especially during a festival. For
a festival is therefore appointed, not that we may behave ourselves unseemly, not
that we may accumulate sins, but rather that we may blot out those which exist.
I know, indeed, that I say these things in vain, yet will I not cease to say
them. For if you do not all obey, yet surely ye will not all disobey; or rather, even
though ye should all be disobedient, my reward will be greater, though yours
will be more condemnation. However, that it may not be more, to this end I will
not cease to speak. For perchance, perchance, by my perseverance I shall be able
to reach you.
Wherefore I beseech you that we do not this to condemnation; let us
nourish Christ, let us give Him drink, let us clothe Him. These things are worthy
of that Table. Have you heard holy hymns? Have you seen a spiritual marriage?