household slave, and freeman, rich and poor, each according to his ability
carrying loads which supply much fuel to this fire by day and night: loads not of
wood or faggots (for the fire is not of that kind), but loads of souls and bodies, of
unrighteousness and iniquity. For such is the material of which a fire of this kind
is wont to be kindled. For those who have riches place no limit anywhere to this
monstrous passion, even if they compass the whole world: and the poor press on
to get in advance of them, and a kind of incurable craze, and unrestrainable
frenzy and irremediable disease possesses the souls of all. And this affection has
conquered every other kind and thrust it away expelling it from the soul: neither
friends nor kindred are taken into account: and why do I speak of friends and
kindred? Not even wife and children are regarded, and what can be dearer to
man than these? But all things are dashed to the ground and trampled underfoot,
when this savage and inhuman mistress has laid hold of the souls of all who are
taken captive by her. For as an inhuman mistress, and harsh tyrant, and savage
barbarian, and public and expensive prostitute she debases and exhausts and
punishes with innumerable dangers and torments those who have chosen to be in
bondage to her; and yet although she is terrible and harsh, and fierce and cruel,
and has the face of a barbarian, or rather of a wild beast, fiercer than a wolf or a
lion, she seems to those who have been taken captive by her gentle and loveable,
and sweeter than honey. And although she forges swords and weapons against
them every day, and digs pitfalls and leads them to precipices and crags and
weaves endless snares of punishment for them, yet is she supposed to make these
things objects of ambition to those who have been made captive, and those who
are desiring to be captured. And just as a sow delights and revels in wallowing in
the ditch and mire, and beetles delight in perpetually crawling over dung; even
so they who are captivated by the love of money are more miserable than these
creatures. For the abomination is greater in this case, and the mire more
offensive: for they who are addicted to this passion imagine that much pleasure
is derived from it: which does not arise from the nature of the thing, but of the
understanding which is afflicted with such an irrational taste. And this taste is

worse in their case than in that of brutes: for as with the mire and the dung the
cause of pleasure is not in them, but in the irrational nature of the creatures who
plunge into it; even so count it to be in the case of human beings.
7. And how might we cure those who are thus disposed? It would be
possible if they would open their ears to us, and unfold their heart, and receive
our words. For it is impossible to turn and divert the irrational animals from their
unclean habit; for they are destitute of reason: but this the gentlest of all tribes,
honoured by reason and speech, I mean human nature, might, if it chose, readily
and easily be released from the mire and the stench, and the dung hill and its
abomination. For wherefore, O man, do riches seem to you worthy such diligent
pursuit? Is it on account of the pleasure which no doubt is derived from the
table? Or on account of the honour and the escort of those who pay court to you,
because of your wealth? Is it because you are able to defend yourself against
those who annoy you, and to be an object of fear to all? For you cannot name
any other reasons, save pleasure and flattery, and fear, and the power of taking
revenge; for wealth is not generally wont to make any one wiser, or more selfcontrolled, or more gentle, or more intelligent, or kind, or benevolent, or
superior to anger, or gluttony or pleasure: it does not train any one to be
moderate, or teach him how to be humble, nor introduce and implant any other
piece of virtue in the soul. Neither could you say for which of these things it
deserves to be so diligently sought and desired. For not only is it ignorant how to
plant and cultivate any good thing, but even if it finds a store of them it mars and
stunts and blights them; and some of them it even uproots, and introduces their
opposites, unmeasured licentiousness, unseasonable wrath, unrighteous anger,
pride, arrogance, foolishness. But let me not speak of these; for they who have
been seized by this malady will not endure to hear about virtue and vice, being
entirely abandoned to pleasure and therefore enslaved to it. Come then let us
forego for the time being the consideration of these points, and let us bring
forward the others which remain, and see whether wealth has any pleasure, or
any honour: for in my eyes the case is quite the reverse. And first of all, if you