3. "He took the loaves," therefore, "and broke them, and gave them by His
disciples," hereby to honor them; and not in honor to them only, but also that,
when the miracle had been done they might not disbelieve it, nor forget it when
it had past, their own hands bearing them witness.
Wherefore also He suffers the multitudes first to have a sense of hunger,
and waits for these to come to Him first and ask Him, and by them makes the
people sit down, and by them distributes; being minded by their own confessions
and actions to prepossess them every one.
Therefore also, from them He receives the loaves, that the testimonies of
what was doing might be many, and that they might have memorials of the
miracle. For if even after these occurrences they forgot, [Matthew 16:9] what
would not have been their case, had He omitted those provisions?
And He commands them to sit down on the trampled grass, instructing the
multitudes in self-denial. For His will was not to feed their bodies only, but also
to instruct their souls. As well by the place therefore, as by His giving them
nothing more than loaves and fishes, and by setting the same before all, and
making it common, and by affording no one more than another, He was teaching
them humility, and temperance, and charity, and to be of like mind one towards
another, and to account all things common.
"And He broke and gave to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitude."
The five loaves He broke and gave, and the five multiplied themselves in the
hands of the disciples. And not even here does He stay the miracle, but He made
them even to exceed; to exceed, not as whole loaves, but as fragments; to signify
that of those loaves these were remains, and in order that the absent might learn
what had been done.
For this purpose indeed He suffered the multitudes to hunger, that no one
might suppose what took place to be illusion.
For this also He caused just twelve baskets to remain over, that Judas also
might bear one. For He was able indeed to have appeased their hunger, but the
disciples would not have known His power, since in Elijah's case also this took

place. [1 Kings 17:16]
At all events, so greatly were the Jews amazed at Him for this, that they
wished even to make Him a king, [John 6:15] although with regard to the other
miracles they did not so in any instance.
What reasoning now may set forth, how the loaves multiplied themselves;
how they flowed together in the wilderness; how they were enough for so many
(for there were "five thousand men beside women and children;" which was a
very great commendation of the people, that both women and men attended
Him); how the remnants had their being (for this again is not less than the
former), and became so abundant, that the baskets were equal in number to the
disciples, and neither more nor less?
Having then taken the fragments, He gave them not to the multitudes, but to
the disciples, and that, because the multitudes were in a more imperfect state
than the disciples.
And, having wrought the miracle, "straightway He constrained His
disciples to get into a ship, and to go before Him unto the other side, while He
sent the multitudes away."
For even if He had seemed, when in sight, to be presenting an illusion, and
not to have wrought a truth; yet surely not in His absence also. For this cause
then, submitting His proceedings to an exact test, He commanded those that had
got the memorials, and the proof of the miracles, to depart from Him.
And besides this, when He is doing great works, He disposes elsewhere of
the multitudes and the disciples, instructing us in nothing to follow after the
glory that comes from the people, nor to collect a crowd about us.
Now by saying, "He constrained them," He indicates the very close
attendance of the disciples.
And His pretext indeed for dismissing them was the multitude, but He was
Himself minded to go up into the mountain; and He did this, instructing us
neither to be always in intercourse with multitudes, nor always to fly from the
crowd, but each of the two as may be expedient, and giving each duly his turn.