FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

Objection 6: Further, clothing is something extraneous to man's
body. Therefore certain kinds of garments should not have been
forbidden to the Jews: for instance (Lev. 19:19): "Thou shalt not wear
a garment that is woven of two sorts": and (Dt. 22:5): "A woman shall
not be clothed with man's apparel, neither shall a man use woman's
apparel": and further on (Dt. 22:11): "Thou shalt not wear a garment
that is woven of woolen and linen together."
Objection 7: Further, to be mindful of God's commandments
concerns not the body but the heart. Therefore it is unsuitably
prescribed (Dt. 6:8, seqq.) that they should "bind" the
commandments of God "as a sign" on their hands; and that they
should "write them in the entry"; and (Num. 15:38, seqq.) that they
should "make to themselves fringes in the corners of their garments,
putting in them ribands of blue . . . they may remember . . . the
commandments of the Lord."
Objection 8: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 9:9) that God does not
"take care for oxen," and, therefore, neither of other irrational
animals. Therefore without reason is it commanded (Dt. 22:6): "If
thou find, as thou walkest by the way, a bird's nest in a tree . . . thou
shalt not take the dam with her young"; and (Dt. 25:4): "Thou shalt
not muzzle the ox that treadeth out thy corn"; and (Lev. 19:19):
"Thou shalt not make thy cattle to gender with beasts of any other
kind."
Objection 9: Further, no distinction was made between clean and
unclean plants. Much less therefore should any distinction have
been made about the cultivation of plants. Therefore it was
unfittingly prescribed (Lev. 19:19): "Thou shalt not sow thy field with
different seeds"; and (Dt. 22:9, seqq.): "Thou shalt sow thy vineyard
with divers seeds"; and: "Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an
ass together."
Objection 1:: Further, it is apparent that inanimate things are most of
all subject to the power of man. Therefore it was unfitting to debar
man from taking silver and gold of which idols were made, or
anything they found in the houses of idols, as expressed in the
commandment of the Law (Dt. 7:25, seqq.). It also seems an absurd
commandment set forth in Dt. 23:13, that they should "dig round
about and . . . cover with earth that which they were eased of."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

Objection 1:: Further, piety is required especially in priests. But it
seems to be an act of piety to assist at the burial of one's friends:
wherefore Tobias is commended for so doing (Tob. 1:20, seqq.). In
like manner it is sometimes an act of piety to marry a loose woman,
because she is thereby delivered from sin and infamy. Therefore it
seems inconsistent for these things to be forbidden to priests (Lev.
21).
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 18:14): "But thou art otherwise
instructed by the Lord thy God": from which words we may gather
that these observances were instituted by God to be a special
prerogative of that people. Therefore they are not without reason or
cause.
I answer that, The Jewish people, as stated above (Article 5), were
specially chosen for the worship of God, and among them the priests
themselves were specially set apart for that purpose. And just as
other things that are applied to the divine worship, need to be
marked in some particular way so that they be worthy of the worship
of God; so too in that people's, and especially the priests', mode of
life, there needed to be certain special things befitting the divine
worship, whether spiritual or corporal. Now the worship prescribed
by the Law foreshadowed the mystery of Christ: so that whatever
they did was a figure of things pertaining to Christ, according to 1
Cor. 10:11: "All these things happened to them in figures."
Consequently the reasons for these observances may be taken in
two ways, first according to their fittingness to the worship of God;
secondly, according as they foreshadow something touching the
Christian mode of life.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 5, ad 4,5), the Law
distinguished a twofold pollution or uncleanness; one, that of sin,
whereby the soul was defiled; and another consisting in some kind
of corruption, whereby the body was in some way infected. Speaking
then of the first-mentioned uncleanness, no kind of food is unclean,
or can defile a man, by reason of its nature; wherefore we read (Mt.
15:11): "Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but what
cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man": which words are
explained (Mt. 15:17) as referring to sins. Yet certain foods can defile
the soul accidentally; in so far as man partakes of them against
obedience or a vow, or from excessive concupiscence; or through
their being an incentive to lust, for which reason some refrain from
wine and flesh-meat.