in works; for he that knows without doing, is even in the way to punishment. "To
walk," he says, that is, always, not once, but continually. As to walk is necessary
for us, so also is to live rightly. And when on this subject he constantly uses the
term "walk," and with reason, showing that such is the life set before us. But not
of this sort is that of the world. And great too is the praise. "To walk," he says,
"worthily of the Lord," and "in every good work," so as to be always advancing,
and nowhere standing still, and, with a metaphor, "bearing fruit and increasing
in the knowledge of God," that you might be in such measure "strengthened,"
according to the might of God, as is possible for man to be. "Through His
power," great is the consolation.— He said not strength, but "power," which is
greater: "through the power," he says, "of His glory," because that everywhere
His glory has the power. He thus comforts him that is under reproach: and again,
"To walk worthily of the Lord." He says of the Son, that He has the power
everywhere both in heaven and in earth, because His glory reigns everywhere.
He says not "strengthened" simply, but so, as they might be expected to be who
are in the service of so strong a Master. "In the knowledge of God." And at the
same time he touches in passing upon the methods of knowledge; for this is to be
in error, not to know God as one ought; or he means, so as to increase in the
knowledge of God. For if he that has not known the Son, knows not the Father
either; justly is there need of increased knowledge: for there is no use in life
without this. "Unto all patience and longsuffering," he says, "with joy, giving
thanks" [Colossians 1:12] unto God. Then being about to exhort them, he makes
no mention of what by and by shall be laid up for them; he did hint at this
however in the beginning of the Epistle, saying, "Because of the hope which is
laid up for you in the heavens" [Colossians 1:5]: but in this place he mentions
the things which were already theirs, for these are the causes of the other. And he
does the same in many places. For that which has already come to pass gains
belief, and more carries the hearer along with it. "With joy," he says, "giving
thanks" to God. The connection is this. We cease not praying for you, and giving
thanks for the benefits already received.

Do you see how he bears himself along into speaking of the Son? For if "we
give thanks with much joy," it is a great thing that is spoken of. For it is possible
to give thanks only from fear, it is possible to give thanks even when in sorrow.
For instance; Job gave thanks indeed, but in anguish; and he said, "The Lord
gave, the Lord has taken away." [Job 1:21] For, let not any say that what had
come to pass pained him not, nor clothed him with dejection of soul; nor let his
great praise be taken away from that righteous one. But when it is thus, it is not
for fear, nor because of His being Lord alone, but for the very nature of the
things themselves, that we give thanks. "To Him who made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light." He has said a great thing.
What has been given, he says, is of this nature; He has not only given, but also
made us strong to receive. Now by saying, "Who made us meet," he showed that
the thing was one of great weight. For example, were some low person to have
become a king, he has it in his power to give a governorship to whom he will;
and this is the extent of his power, to give the dignity: he cannot also make the
person fit for the office, and oftentimes the honor makes one so preferred even
ridiculous. If however he have both conferred on one the dignity, and also made
him fit for the honor, and equal to the administration, then indeed the thing is an
honor. This then is what he also says here; that He has not only given us the
honor, but has also made us strong enough to receive it.
For the honor here is twofold, the giving, and the making fit for the gift. He
said not, gave, simply; but, "made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the saints in light," that is, who has appointed us a place with the saints. But he
did not say simply placed us, but has given us to enjoy even the very same
things, for "the portion" is that which each one receives. For it is possible to be
in the same city, and yet not enjoy the same things; but to have the same
"portion," and yet not enjoy the same, is impossible. It is possible to be in the
same inheritance, and yet not to have the same portion; for instance, all we
(clergy) are in the inheritance, but we have not all the same portion. But here he
does not say this, but with the inheritance adds the portion also. But why does he