THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.3.

carnal and earthly body, the manifestation would have been false,
had He had a heavenly body. Hence (De Eccles. Dogm. ii) it is said:
"The Son of God was born, taking flesh of the Virgin's body, and not
bringing it with Him from heaven."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ is said in two ways to have come down
from heaven. First, as regards His Divine Nature; not indeed that the
Divine Nature ceased to be in heaven, but inasmuch as He began to
be here below in a new way, viz. by His assumed. nature, according
to Jn. 3:13: "No man hath ascended into heaven, but He that
descended from heaven, the Son of Man, Who is in heaven."
Secondly, as regards His body, not indeed that the very substance of
the body of Christ descended from heaven, but that His body was
formed by a heavenly power, i.e. by the Holy Ghost. Hence
Augustine, explaining the passage quoted, says (Ad Orosium [Dial.
Qq. lxv, qu. 4]): "I call Christ a heavenly man because He was not
conceived of human seed." And Hilary expounds it in the same way
(De Trin. x).
Reply to Objection 2: Flesh and blood are not taken here for the
substance of flesh and blood, but for the corruption of flesh, which
was not in Christ as far as it was sinful; but as far as it was a
punishment; thus, for a time, it was in Christ, that He might carry
through the work of our redemption.
Reply to Objection 3: It pertains to the greatest glory of God to have
raised a weak and earthly body to such sublimity. Hence in the
General Council of Ephesus (P. II, Act. I) we read the saying of St.
Theophilus: "Just as the best workmen are esteemed not merely for
displaying their skill in precious materials, but very often because by
making use of the poorest . . . lay and commonest earth, they show
the power of their craft; so the best of all workmen, the Word of God,
did not come down to us by taking a heavenly body of some most
precious matter, but shewed the greatness of His skill in clay."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Son of God assumed a soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Son of God did not assume a
soul. For John has said, teaching the mystery of the Incarnation (Jn.
1:14): "The Word was made flesh"---no mention being made of a
soul. Now it is not said that "the Word was made flesh" as if changed
to flesh, but because He assumed flesh. Therefore He seems not to
have assumed a soul.
Objection 2: Further, a soul is necessary to the body, in order to
quicken it. But this was not necessary for the body of Christ, as it
would seem, for of the Word of God it is written (Ps. 35:10): Lord,
"with Thee is the fountain of life." Therefore it would seem altogether
superfluous for the soul to be there, when the Word was present. But
"God and nature do nothing uselessly," as the Philosopher says (De
Coel. i, 32; ii, 56). Therefore the Word would seem not to have
assumed a soul.
Objection 3: Further, by the union of soul and body is constituted the
common nature, which is the human species. But "in the Lord Jesus
Christ we are not to look for a common species," as Damascene
says (De Fide Orth. iii, 3). Therefore He did not assume a soul.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Agone Christ. xxi): "Let us not
hearken to such as say that only a human body was assumed by the
Word of God; and take 'the Word was made flesh' to mean that the
man had no soul nor any other part of a man, save flesh."
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Haeres. 69,55), it was first of all
the opinion of Arius and then of Apollinaris that the Son of God
assumed only flesh, without a soul, holding that the Word took the
place of a soul to the body. And consequently it followed that there
were not two natures in Christ, but only one; for from a soul and
body one human nature is constituted. But this opinion cannot hold,
for three reasons. First, because it is counter to the authority of
Scripture, in which our Lord makes mention of His soul, Mt. 26:38:
"My soul is sorrowful even unto death"; and Jn. 10:18: "I have power
to lay down My soul [animam meam: Douay: 'My life']." But to this
Apollinaris replied that in these words soul is taken metaphorically,
in which way mention is made in the Old Testament of the soul of
God (Is. 1:14): "My soul hateth your new moons and your