not simply in "fear," but even in "trembling" at his perils, he so ran as ever to
keep his crown; and gave not in for any danger, in his task of purging out the
world, and everywhere both by sea and land sowing the Gospel.

1 Corinthians 2:4
3. "And my speech and my preaching was not in persuasive words of
wisdom:" that is, had not the wisdom from without. Now if the doctrine preached
had nothing subtle, and they that were called were unlearned, and he that
preached was of the same description, and thereto was added persecution, and
trembling and fear; tell me, how did they overcome without Divine power? And
this is why, having said, "My speech and my preaching was not in persuasive
words of wisdom," he added, "but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power."
Do you perceive how "the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the
weakness stronger?" They for their part, being unlearned and preaching such a
Gospel, in their chains and persecution overcame their persecutors. Whereby?
Was it not by their furnishing that evidence which is of the Spirit? For this
indeed is confessed demonstration. For who, tell me, after he had seen dead men
rising to life and devils cast out, could have helped admitting it?
But seeing that there are also deceiving wonders, such as those of sorcerers,
he removes this suspicion also. For he said not simply "of power," but first, "of
the Spirit," and then, "of power:" signifying that the things done were spiritual.
It is no disparagement, therefore, that the Gospel was not declared by
means of wisdom; rather it is a very great ornament. For this, it will be allowed,
is the clearest token of its being divine and having its roots from above, out of
the heavens. Wherefore he added also,

1 Corinthians 2:5
"That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God."
Do you see how clearly in every way he has set forth the vast gain of this
"ignorance," and the great loss of this "wisdom?" For the latter made void the
Cross, but the former proclaimed the power of God: the latter, besides their
failing to discover any of those things which they most needed, set them also
upon boasting of themselves; the former, besides their receiving the truth, led
them also to pride themselves in God. Again, wisdom would have persuaded
many to suspect that the doctrine was of man: this clearly demonstrated it to be
divine, and to have come down from heaven. Now when demonstration is made
by wisdom of words, even the worse oftentimes overcome the better, having
more skill in words; and falsehood outstrips the truth. But in this case it is not so:
for neither does the Spirit enter into an unclean soul, nor, having entered in, can
it ever be subdued; even though all possible cleverness of speech assail it. For
the demonstration by works and signs is far more evident than that by words.
4. But some one may say perhaps, "If the Gospel is to prevail and has no
need of words, lest the Cross be made of none effect; for what reason are signs
withholden now?" For what reason? Speakest thou in unbelief and not allowing
that they were done even in the times of the Apostles, or do you truly seek to
know? If in unbelief, I will first make my stand against this. I say then, If signs
were not done at that time, how did they, chased, and persecuted, and trembling,
and in chains, and having become the common enemies of the world, and
exposed to all as a mark for ill usage, and with nothing of their own to allure,
neither speech, nor show, nor wealth, nor city, nor nation, nor family, nor pursuit
([ἐπιτήδευμα],) nor glory, nor any such like thing; but with all things contrary,
ignorance, meanness, poverty, hatred, enmity, and setting themselves against