your servants to wait on you, and make free use of your meats and drinks! But
everywhere drive out excess, for that it is which causes sin, and the same thing,
whatever it be, if it becomes excessive, becomes a sin; so that excess is nothing
else than sin. For observe, when anger is excited above what is meet, then it
rushes out into insult, then it commits every sort of injury; so does inordinate
passion for beauty, for riches, for glory, or for anything else. And tell me not,
that indeed, those of whom I spoke were strong; for many far weaker and richer,
and more luxurious than you are, have taken upon them that austere and rugged
life. And why speak I of men? Damsels not yet twenty years old, who have spent
their whole time in inner chambers, and in a delicate and effeminate mode of
life, in inner chambers full of sweet ointments and perfumes, reclining on soft
couches, themselves soft in their nature, and rendered yet more tender by their
over indulgence, who all the day long have had no other business than to adorn
themselves, to wear jewels, and to enjoy every luxury, who never waited on
themselves, but had numerous handmaids standing beside them, who wore soft
raiment softer than their skin, fine linen and delicate, who reveled continually in
roses and such like sweet odors—yea, these very ones, in a moment, seized with
Christ's flame, have put off all that indolence and even their very nature, have
forgotten their delicateness and youth, and like so many noble wrestlers, have
stripped themselves of that soft clothing, and rushed into the midst of the
contest. And perhaps I shall appear to be telling things incredible, yet
nevertheless are they true. These then, these very tender damsels, as I myself
have heard, have brought themselves to such a degree of severe training, that
they will wrap the coarsest horsehair about their own naked bodies, and go with
those tender soles unsandaled, and will lie upon a bed of leaves: nay more, that
they watch the greater part of the night, and that they take no heed of perfumes
nor of any other of their old delights, but will even let their head, once so
carefully dressed, go without special care, with the hair just plainly and simply
bound up, so as not to fall into unseemliness. And their only meal is in the
evening, a meal not even of herbs nor of bread, but of flour and beans and pulse

and olives and figs. They spin without intermission, and labor far harder than
their handmaids at home. What more? They will take upon them to wait upon
women who are sick, carrying their beds, and washing their feet. Nay, many of
them even cook. So great is the power of the flame of Christ; so far does their
zeal surpass their very nature.
However, I demand nothing like this of you, seeing you have a mind to be
outstripped by women. Yet at least, if there be any tasks not too laborious, at
least perform these: restrain the rude hand, and the incontinent eye. What is
there, tell me, so hard, what so difficult? Do what is just and right, wrong no
man, be ye poor or rich, shopkeepers or hired servants; for unrighteousness may
extend even to the poor. Or see ye not how many broils these engage in, and turn
all things upside down? Marry freely, and have children. Paul also gave charge
to such, to such he wrote. Is that struggle I spoke of too great, and the rock too
lofty, and its top too near unto Heaven, and are you unable to attain to such an
height? At least then lay hold on lesser things, and aim at those which are lower.
Have you not courage to get rid of your own riches? At least then forbear to
seize on the things of others, and to do them wrong. Are you unable to fast? At
least then give not yourself to self-indulgence. Are you unable to lie upon a bed
of leaves? Still, prepare not for yourselves couches inlaid with silver; but use a
couch and coverings formed not for display, but for refreshment; not couches of
ivory. Make yourself small. Why fill your vessel with overwhelming cargoes? If
you be lightly equipped, you shall have nothing to fear, no envy, no robbers, no
liers in wait. For indeed you are not so rich in money as you are in cares. Thou
aboundest not so much in possessions, as in anxieties and in perils, "which bring
in many temptations and lusts." [1 Timothy 6:9] These things they endure, who
desire to gain great possessions. I say not, minister unto the sick; yet, at least, bid
your servant do it. Do you see then how that this is no toilsome task? No, for
how can it be, when tender damsels surpass us by so great a distance? Let us be
ashamed of ourselves, I entreat you; for in worldly matters, to be sure, we in no
point yield to them, neither in wars, nor in games; but in the spiritual contest