man's case, upon his uttering a speech in no way worthy of His power—"If You
can, help me,"— see how He corrects it, as not rightly spoken. For what says
He? "If you can believe, all things are possible to him that believes." What He
says is like this: "Such abundance of power is with me, that I can even make
others work these miracles. So that if you believe as one ought, even you yourself
art able," says He, "to heal both this one, and many others." And having thus
said, He set free the possessed of the devil.
But do thou not only from this observe His providence and His beneficence,
but also from that other time, during which He allowed the devil to be in him.
Since surely, unless the man had been favored with much providential care even
then, he would have perished long ago; for "it cast him both into the fire," so it is
said, "and into the water." And he that dared this would assuredly have
destroyed the man too, unless even in so great madness God had put on him His
strong curb: as indeed was the case with those naked men that were running in
the deserts and cutting themselves with stones.
And if he call him "a lunatic," trouble not yourself at all, for it is the father
of the possessed who speaks the word. How then says the evangelist also, "He
healed many that were lunatic?" Denominating them according to the
impression of the multitude. For the evil spirit, to bring a reproach upon nature,
by wine? For the weaker the vessel, the more entire the shipwreck, whether she
be free or a slave. For the free woman behaves herself unseemly in the midst of
her slaves as spectators, and the slave again in like manner in the midst of the
slaves, and they cause the gifts of God to be blasphemously spoken of by foolish
men.
For instance, I hear many say, when these excesses happen, "Would there
were no wine." O folly! O madness! When other men sin, do you find fault with
God's gifts? And what great madness is this? What? Did the wine, O man,
produce this evil? Not the wine, but the intemperance of such as take an evil
delight in it. Say then, "Would there were no drunkenness, no luxury;" but if you
say, "Would there were no wine," you will say, going on by degrees, "Would

there were no steel, because of the murderers; no night, because of the thieves;
no light, because of the informers; no women, because of adulteries;" and, in a
word, you will destroy all.
But do not so; for this is of a satanical mind; do not find fault with the wine,
but with the drunkenness; and when you have found this self-same man sober,
sketch out all his unseemliness, and say unto him, Wine was given, that we
might be cheerful, not that we might behave ourselves unseemly; that we might
laugh, not that we might be a laughingstock; that we might be healthful, not that
we might be diseased; that we might correct the weakness of our body, not cast
down the might of our soul.
God honored you with the gift, why disgrace yourself with the excess
thereof? Hear what Paul says, "Use a little wine for your stomach's sake, and
your frequent infirmities." [1 Timothy 5:23] But if that saint, even when
oppressed with disease, and enduring successive sicknesses, partook not of wine,
until his Teacher suffered him; what excuse shall we have, who are drunken in
health? To him indeed He said, "Use a little wine for your stomach's sake;" but
to each of you who are drunken, He will say, "Use little wine, for your
fornications, your frequent filthy talking, for the other wicked desires to which
drunkenness is wont to give birth." But if you are not willing, for these reasons,
to abstain; at least on account of the despondencies which come of it, and the
vexations, do ye abstain. For wine was given for gladness, "Yea, wine," so it is
said, "makes glad the heart of man:" but you mar even this excellence in it. For
what kind of gladness is it to be beside one's self, and to have innumerable
vexations, and to see all things whirling round, and to be oppressed with
giddiness, and like those that have a fever, to require some who may drench their
heads with oil?
6. These things are not said by me to all: or rather they are said to all, not
because all are drunken, God forbid; but because they who do not drink take no
thought of the drunken. Therefore even against you do I rather inveigh, that are
in health; since the physician too leaves the sick, and addresses his discourse to