SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.151, C.2.

organ. Hence if the organ lose its integrity by chance in some other
way, this is no more prejudicial to virginity than being deprived of a
hand or foot.
Reply to Objection 4: Pleasure resulting from resolution of semen
may arise in two ways. If this be the result of the mind's purpose, it
destroys virginity, whether copulation takes place or not. Augustine,
however, mentions copulation, because such like resolution is the
ordinary and natural result thereof. In another way this may happen
beside the purpose of the mind, either during sleep, or through
violence and without the mind's consent, although the flesh derives
pleasure from it, or again through weakness of nature, as in the case
of those who are subject to a flow of semen. In such cases virginity
is not forfeit, because such like pollution is not the result of impurity
which excludes virginity.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.151, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether virginity is unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that virginity is unlawful. For whatever is
contrary to a precept of the natural law is unlawful. Now just as the
words of Gn. 2:16, "Of every tree" that is in "paradise, thou shalt
eat," indicate a precept of the natural law, in reference to the
preservation of the individual, so also the words of Gn. 1:28,
"Increase and multiply, and fill the earth," express a precept of the
natural law, in reference to the preservation of the species. Therefore
just as it would be a sin to abstain from all food, as this would be to
act counter to the good of the individual, so too it is a sin to abstain
altogether from the act of procreation, for this is to act against the
good of the species.
Objection 2: Further, whatever declines from the mean of virtue is
apparently sinful. Now virginity declines from the mean of virtue,
since it abstains from all venereal pleasures: for the Philosopher
says (Ethic. ii, 2), that "he who revels in every pleasure, and abstains
from not even one, is intemperate: but he who refrains from all is
loutish and insensible." Therefore virginity is something sinful.
Objection 3: Further, punishment is not due save for a vice. Now in
olden times those were punished who led a celibate life, as Valerius
Maximus asserts [Dict. Fact. Mem. ii, 9]. Hence according to
Augustine (De Vera Relig. iii) Plato "is said to have sacrificed to
nature, in order that he might atone for his perpetual continency as
though it were a sin." Therefore virginity is a sin.
On the contrary, No sin is a matter of direct counsel. But virginity is
a matter of direct counsel: for it is written (1 Cor. 7:25): "Concerning
virgins I have no commandment of the Lord: but I give counsel."
Therefore virginity is not an unlawful thing.
I answer that, In human acts, those are sinful which are against right
reason. Now right reason requires that things directed to an end
should be used in a measure proportionate to that end. Again, man's
good is threefold as stated in Ethic. i, 8; one consisting in external
things, for instance riches; another, consisting in bodily goods; the
third, consisting in the goods of the soul among which the goods of
the contemplative life take precedence of the goods of the active life,
as the Philosopher shows (Ethic. x, 7), and as our Lord declared (Lk.