FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.4.

good gifts whoever is liberated, is most certainly liberated." Hence if
God intends, while moving, that the one whose heart He moves
should attain to grace, he will infallibly attain to it, according to Jn.
6:45: "Every one that hath heard of the Father, and hath learned,
cometh to Me."
Reply to Objection 1: This gloss is speaking of such as fly to God by
a meritorious act of their free-will, already "informed" with grace; for
if they did not receive grace, it would be against the justice which He
Himself established. Or if it refers to the movement of free-will before
grace, it is speaking in the sense that man's flight to God is by a
Divine motion, which ought not, in justice, to fail.
Reply to Objection 2: The first cause of the defect of grace is on our
part; but the first cause of the bestowal of grace is on God's
according to Osee 13:9: "Destruction is thy own, O Israel; thy help is
only in Me."
Reply to Objection 3: Even in natural things, the form does not
necessarily ensue the disposition of the matter, except by the power
of the agent that causes the disposition.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether grace is greater in one than in another?

Objection 1: It would seem that grace is not greater in one than in
another. For grace is caused in us by the Divine love, as stated
above (Question 110, Article 1). Now it is written (Wis. 6:8): "He made
the little and the great and He hath equally care of all." Therefore all
obtain grace from Him equally.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is the greatest possible, cannot be
more or less. But grace is the greatest possible, since it joins us with
our last end. Therefore there is no greater or less in it. Hence it is not
greater in one than in another.
Objection 3: Further, grace is the soul's life, as stated above
(Question 110, Article 1, ad 2). But there is no greater or less in life.
Hence, neither is there in grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Eph. 4:7): "But to every one of us is
given grace according to the measure of the giving of Christ." Now
what is given in measure, is not given to all equally. Hence all have
not an equal grace.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 52, Articles 1,2; Question
56, Articles 1,2), habits can have a double magnitude: one, as
regards the end or object, as when a virtue is said to be more noble
through being ordained to a greater good; the other on the part of
the subject, which more or less participates in the habit inhering to
it.
Now as regards the first magnitude, sanctifying grace cannot be
greater or less, since, of its nature, grace joins man to the Highest
Good, which is God. But as regards the subject, grace can receive
more or less, inasmuch as one may be more perfectly enlightened by
grace than another. And a certain reason for this is on the part of
him who prepares himself for grace; since he who is better prepared
for grace, receives more grace. Yet it is not here that we must seek
the first cause of this diversity, since man prepares himself, only
inasmuch as his free-will is prepared by God. Hence the first cause
of this diversity is to be sought on the part of the God, Who
dispenses His gifts of grace variously, in order that the beauty and
perfection of the Church may result from these various degree; even