hoped to accomplish their object, through these each received an hindrance.
Jonah expected to escape by the ship, and the ship became his chain. These
couriers, by means of their horses, expected the more quickly to see the
Emperor; and the horses became the obstacles; or rather, neither the horses in
one case, nor the ship in the other, but the Providence of God everywhere
directing all things according to its own wisdom!
5. Consider also His care over us, and how He both affrighted and consoled
us. For after permitting them to set out on the very day when all these outrages
were committed, as if they would report all that had taken place to the Emperor;
He alarmed us all at their sudden departure. But when they had gone, and two or
three days had elapsed, and we thought the journey of our Priest would now be
useless, as he would arrive when it was too late, He delivered us from this fear,
and comforted us by detaining them, as I observed, midway; and by providing
persons coming to us from thence by the same road, to announce to us all the
difficulties they had met with on their journey, that we might thus take a little
breath, as indeed we did, and were relieved of a great part of our anxiety. Having
heard of this, we adored God who had done it, who has even now more tenderly
than any father disposed all things for us, delaying by some invisible power
those evil messengers, and all but saying to them, "Why do ye hasten? Why do ye
press on, when you are going to overwhelm so great a city? For are you the
bearers of a good message to the Emperor? Wait there till I have made ready my
servant, as an excellent physician, to come up with you and anticipate you in
your course." But if there was so much of providential care in the first breaking
out of this wound of iniquity, much more shall we obtain a greater freedom from
anxiety, after conversion, after repentance, after so much fear, after tears and
prayers. For Jonah was very properly constrained, in order that he might be
forcibly brought to repentance; but you have already given striking evidences of
repentance, and conversion. Therefore, it is necessary that you should receive
consolation, instead of a threatening messenger. For this reason also has He sent
our common father hence, notwithstanding the many things to hinder it. But if

He had not been tender of our safety, He would not have persuaded him to this,
but would have hindered him, however disposed he might be to undertake the
journey.
6. There is a third reason by which I may possibly persuade you to have
confidence; I mean, the present sacred season, which almost all, even
unbelievers, respect; but to which this our divinely-favoured Emperor has shown
such reverence and honour, as to surpass all the Emperors who have reigned with
a regard for religion before him. As a proof of this, by sending a letter on these
days in honour of the feast, he liberated nearly all those who were lodged in
prison; and this letter our Priest when he arrives will read to him; and remind
him of his own laws, and will say to him, "Do thou exhort yourself, and
remember your own deeds! You have an example for your philanthropy at home!
You chose to forbear from executing a justifiable slaughter, and will you endure
to perpetrate one that is unjust. Reverencing the feast, you discharged those who
had been convicted and condemned; and will you, I ask, condemn the innocent,
and those who have not committed any violence, and this when the sacred
season is present? That be far from you, O Emperor! Thou, speaking by this
Epistle to all the cities, said, 'Would it were possible for me to raise even the
dead.' This philanthropy and these words we now stand in need of. To conquer
enemies, does not render kings so illustrious, as to conquer wrath and anger; for
in the former case, the success is due to arms and soldiers; but here the trophy is
simply your own, and you have no one to divide with you the glory of your moral
wisdom. You have overcome barbarian war, overcome also Imperial wrath! Let
all unbelievers learn that the fear of Christ is able to bridle every kind of
authority. Glorify your Lord by forgiving the trespasses of your fellow-servants;
that He also may glorify you the more; that at the Day of Judgment, He may
bend on you an Eye merciful and serene, being mindful of this your
lovingkindness!" This, and much more, he will say, and will assuredly rescue us
from the Emperor's wrath. And not only will this fast be of the greatest
assistance to us in influencing the Emperor in our favour, but also towards