been abandoned to oblivion? The warnings were sounding in their ears. Again
let me utter, yet again I will speak. What profit will there be? Certainly there will
be profit. For if all do not hearken, the half will hearken; and if not the half, the
third part: and if not the third the fourth: and if not the fourth, perhaps ten: and if
not ten, perhaps five: and if not five perhaps one: and if not one, I myself have
the reward prepared for me. "The grass withers and the flower fades; but the
word of God abides for ever." [Isaiah 40:8]
3. Have ye seen the insignificance of human affairs? Have ye seen the
frailty of power? Have ye seen the wealth which I always called a runaway and
not a runaway only, but also a murderer. For it not only deserts those who
possess it, but also slaughters them; for when any one pays court to it then most
of all does it betray him. Why do you pay court to wealth which today is for you,
and tomorrow for another? Why do you court wealth which can never be held
fast? Do you desire to court it? Do you desire to hold it fast? Do not bury it but
give it into the hands of the poor. For wealth is a wild beast: if it be tightly held it
runs away: if it be let loose it remains where it is; "For," it is said, "he has
dispersed abroad and given to the poor; his righteousness remains forever."
Disperse it then that it may remain with you; bury it not lest it run away. Where
is wealth? I would gladly enquire of those who have departed. Now I say these
things not by way of reproach, God forbid, nor by way of irritating old sores, but
as endeavouring to secure a haven for you out of the shipwreck of others. When
soldiers and swords were threatening, when the city was in a blaze of fury, when
the imperial majesty was powerless, and the purple was insulted, when all places
were full of frenzy, where was wealth then? Where was your silver plate? Where
were your silver couches? Where your household slaves? They had all betaken
themselves to flight; where were the eunuchs? They all ran away; where were
your friends? They changed their masks. Where were your houses? They were
shut up. Where was your money? The owner of it fled: and the money itself,
where was that? It was buried. Where was it all hidden? Am I oppressive and
irksome to you in constantly declaring that wealth betrays those who use it

badly? The occasion has now come which proves the truth of my words. Why do
you hold it so tightly, when in the time of trial it profits you nothing? If it has
power when you fall into a strait, let it come to your aid, but if it then runs away
what need have you of it? Events themselves bear witness. What profit was there
in it? The sword was whetted, death was impending, an army raging: there was
apprehension of imminent peril; and yet wealth was nowhere to be seen. Where
did the runaway flee? It was itself the cause which brought about all these evils,
and yet in the hours of necessity it runs away. Nevertheless many reproach me
saying continually thou fastens upon the rich: while they on the other hand
fasten upon the poor. Well I do fasten upon the rich: or rather not the rich, but
those who make a bad use of their riches. For I am continually saying that I do
not attack the character of the rich man, but of the rapacious. A rich man is one
thing, a rapacious man is another: an affluent man is one thing, a covetous man
is another. Make clear distinctions, and do not confuse things which are diverse.
Are you a rich man? I forbid you not. Are you a rapacious man? I denounce you.
Have you property of your own? Enjoy it. Do you take the property of others? I
will not hold my peace. Would you stone me for this? I am ready to shed my
blood: only I forbid your sin. I heed not hatred, I heed not war: one thing only do
I heed, the advancement of my hearers. The rich are my children, and the poor
also are my children: the same womb has travailed with both, both are the
offspring of the same travail-pangs. If then you fasten reproaches on the poor
man, I denounce you: for the poor man does not suffer so much loss as the rich.
For no great wrong is inflicted on the poor man, seeing that in his case the injury
is confined to money; but in your case the injury touches the soul. Let him who
wills cast me off, let him who wills stone me, let him who wills hate me: for the
plots of enemies are the pledges to me of crowns of victory, and the number of
my rewards will be as the number of my wounds.
4. So then I fear not an enemy's plots: one thing only do I fear, which is sin.
If no one convicts me of sin, then let the whole world make war upon me. For
this kind of war only renders me more prosperous. Thus also do I wish to teach