SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.4.

wherefore they may come to be used by anyone, and thus it is that
they fall into the hands of the laity.
Reply to Objection 1: In the Old Law, as stated above (Article 1, ad 4),
special tithes were earmarked for the assistance of the poor. But in
the New Law the tithes are given to the clergy, not only for their own
support, but also that the clergy may use them in assisting the poor.
Hence they are not unnecessary; indeed Church property, oblations
and first-fruits as well as tithes are all necessary for this same
purpose.
Reply to Objection 2: Personal tithes are due to the church in whose
parish a man dwells, while predial tithes seem more reasonably to
belong to the church within whose bounds the land is situated. The
law, however, prescribes that in this matter a custom that has
obtained for a long time must be observed [Cap. Cum sint, and Cap.
Ad apostolicae, de Decimis, etc.]. The shepherd who grazes his flock
at different seasons in two parishes, should pay tithe proportionately
to both churches. And since the fruit of the flock is derived from the
pasture, the tithe of the flock is due to the church in whose lands the
flock grazes, rather than to the church on whose land the fold is
situated.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as the Church can hand over to a layman
the things she receives under the title of tithe, so too can she allow
him to receive tithes that are yet to be paid, the right of receiving
being reserved to the ministers of the Church. The motive may be
either the need of the Church, as when tithes are due to certain
soldiers through being granted to them in fee by the Church, or it
may be the succoring of the poor; thus certain tithes have been
granted by way of alms to certain lay religious, or to those that have
no care of souls. Some religious, however, are competent to receive
tithes, because they have care of souls.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the clergy also are bound to pay tithes?

Objection 1: It would seem that clerics also are bound to pay tithes.
By common law [Cap. Cum homines, de Decimis, etc.] the parish
church should receive the tithes on the lands which are in its
territory. Now it happens sometimes that the clergy have certain
lands of their own on the territory of some parish church, or that one
church has ecclesiastical property on the territory of another.
Therefore it would seem that the clergy are bound to pay predial
tithes.
Objection 2: Further, some religious are clerics; and yet they are
bound to pay tithes to churches on account of the lands which they
cultivate even with their own hands [Cap. Ex parte, and Cap. Nuper.].
Therefore it would seem that the clergy are not immune from the
payment of tithes.
Objection 3: Further, in the eighteenth chapter of Numbers (26,28), it
is prescribed not only that the Levites should receive tithes from the
people, but also that they should themselves pay tithes to the highpriest. Therefore the clergy are bound to pay tithes to the Sovereign
Pontiff, no less than the laity are bound to pay tithes to the clergy.
Objection 4: Further, tithes should serve not only for the support of
the clergy, but also for the assistance of the poor. Therefore, if the
clergy are exempt from paying tithes, so too are the poor. Yet the
latter is not true. Therefore the former is false.
On the contrary, A decretal of Pope Paschal [Paschal II] says: "It is a
new form of exaction when the clergy demand tithes from the
clergy" [Cap. Novum genus, de Decimis, etc.].
I answer that, The cause of giving cannot be the cause of receiving,
as neither can the cause of action be the cause of passion; yet it
happens that one and the same person is giver and receiver, even as
agent and patient, on account of different causes and from different
points of view. Now tithes are due to the clergy as being ministers of
the altar and sowers of spiritual things among the people. Wherefore
those members of the clergy as such, i.e. as having ecclesiastical
property, are not bound to pay tithes; whereas from some other
cause through holding property in their own right, either by