but also on account of the harm arising therefrom. That is to say, even if there be
a root of this kind, do not suffer any shoot to come up, but let it be cut off, that it
may not bear its proper fruits, that so it may not defile and pollute the others
also. For, he says, "Lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you; and by it
many be defiled."
And with good reason did he call sin "bitter": for truly nothing is more
bitter than sin, and they know it, who after they have committed it pine away
under their conscience, who endure much bitterness. For being exceedingly
bitter, it perverts the reasoning faculty itself. Such is the nature of what is bitter:
it is unprofitable.
And well said he, "root of bitterness." He said not, "bitter," but "of
bitterness." For it is possible that a bitter root might bear sweet fruits; but it is
not possible that a root and fountain and foundation of bitterness, should ever
bear sweet fruit; for all is bitter, it has nothing sweet, all are bitter, all unpleasant,
all full of hatred and abomination.
"And by this" (he says) "many be defiled." That is, Cut off the lascivious
persons.

Hebrews 12:16
2. "Lest there be any fornicator: or profane person, as Esau, who for one
morsel of meat sold his birthright."
And wherein was Esau a "fornicator"? He does not say that Esau was a
fornicator. "Lest there be any fornicator," he says, then, "follow after holiness:
lest there be any, as Esau, profane": that is, gluttonous, without self-control,
worldly, selling away things spiritual.
"Who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright," who through his own
slothfulness sold this honor which he had from God, and for a little pleasure, lost
the greatest honor and glory. This was suitable to them. This [was the conduct]
of an abominable, of an unclean person. So that not only is the fornicator
unclean, but also the glutton, the slave of his belly. For he also is a slave of a
different pleasure. He is forced to be overreaching, he is forced to be rapacious,
to behave himself unseemly in ten thousand ways, being the slave of that
passion, and oftentimes he blasphemes. So he accounted "his birthright" to be
nothing worth. That is, providing for temporary refreshment, he went even to the
[sacrifice of his] "birthright." So henceforth "the birthright" belongs to us, not to
the Jews. And at the same time also this is added to their calamity, that the first
has become last, and the second, first: the one, for courageous endurance; the
other last for indolence.

Hebrews 12:17
3. "For you know" (he says) "how that afterward, when he would have
inherited the blessing, he was rejected. For he found no place of repentance,
though he sought it carefully with tears." What now is this? Does he indeed
exclude repentance? By no means. 'But how, you say, was it that "he found no
place of repentance"?' For if he condemned himself, if he made a great wailing,
why did he "find no place of repentance"? Because it was not really a case of
repentance. For as the grief of Cain was not of repentance, and the murder
proved it; so also in this case, his words were not those of repentance, and the
murder afterwards proved it. For even he also in intention slew Jacob. For "The
days of mourning for my father," he said, "are at hand; then will I slay my
brother Jacob." [Genesis 27:41] "Tears" had not power to give him
"repentance." And [the Apostle] did not say "by repentance" simply, but even
"with tears, he found no place of repentance." Why now? Because he did not
repent as he ought, for this is repentance; he repented not as it behooved him.
For how is it that he [the Apostle] said this? How did he exhort them again
after they had become "sluggish" [Hebrews 6:12]? How, when they had become
"lame"? How, when they were "paralyzed" [Hebrews 12:13]? How, when they
were "relaxed" [Hebrews 12:12]? For this is the beginning of a fall. He seems to
me to hint at some fornicators among them, but not to wish at that time to correct
them: but feigns ignorance that they might correct themselves. For it is right at
first indeed to pretend ignorance: but afterwards, when they continue [in sin],
then to add reproof also, that so they may not become shameless. Which Moses
also did in the case of Zimri and the daughter of Cosbi.
"For he found" (he says) "no place of repentance," he found not repentance;
or that he sinned beyond repentance. There are then sins beyond repentance. His
meaning is, Let us not fall by an incurable fall. So long as it is a matter of