even of his own interests. For when a man overlooks the concerns of his
neighbor, and is careless of them, how should he regard his own? For as he that
looks to his neighbor's affairs will in them order his own to advantage, so he that
looks down upon his neighbor's concerns will neglect his own. For if we are
members one of another, the welfare of our neighbor is not his concern only, but
that of the whole body, and the injury of our neighbor is not confined to him, but
distracts with pains all else as well. If we are a building, whatever part is
weakened, it affects the whole, while that which is solid gives strength and
support to the rest. So also in the Church, if you have slighted your neighbor,
you have injured yourself. How? In that one of your own members has suffered
no small hurt. And if he, who does not impart of his possessions, goes into Hell,
much more will he be condemned, who sees a neighbor suffering severer evils,
and does not stretch out his hand, since in this case the loss is more grievous.
"For men shall be lovers of their own selves." He that loves himself may be
said not to love himself, but he that loves his brother, loves himself in the truest
sense. From self-love springs covetousness. For the wretched niggardly temper
of self-love contracts that love which should be widely extended, and diffused on
every side. "Covetous." From covetousness springs boastfulness, from
boastfulness pride, from pride blasphemy, from blasphemy defiance and
disobedience. For he who exalts himself against men, will easily do it against
God. Thus sins are produced. Often they ascend from below. He that is pious
towards men, is still more pious towards God. He who is meek to his fellowservants, is more meek to his Master. He that despises his fellow-servants, will
end with despising God Himself. Moral . Let us not then despise one another, for
that is an evil training which teaches us to despise God. And indeed to despise
one another is in effect to despise God, Who commanded us to show all regard
to one another. And this may be otherwise manifested by an example. Cain
despised his brother, and so, immediately after, he despised God. How despised
Him? Mark his insolent answer to God; "Am I my brother's keeper?" [Genesis
4:9] Again, Esau despised his brother, and he too despised God. Wherefore God

said, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." [Romans 9:13; Malachi 1:2-3]
Hence Paul says, "Lest there be any fornicator or profane person as Esau."
[Hebrews 12:16] The brethren of Joseph despised him, and they also despised
God. The Israelites despised Moses, and they also despised God. So too the sons
of Eli despised the people, and they too despised God. Would you see it also
from the contrary? Abraham, who was tender of his brother's son, was obedient
to God, as is manifest in his conduct with respect to his son Isaac, and in all his
other virtues. Again, Abel was meek to his brother, and he also was pious
towards God. Let us not therefore despise one another, lest we learn also to
despise God. Let us honor one another, that we may learn also to honor God. He
that is insolent with respect to men, will also be insolent with respect to God.
But when covetousness and selfishness and insolence meet together, what is
wanting to complete destruction? Everything is corrupted, and a foul flood of
sins bursts in. "Unthankful," he says. For how can the covetous man be thankful?
To whom will he feel gratitude? To no one. He considers all men his enemies,
and desires the goods of all. Though you spend your whole substance upon him,
he will feel no gratitude. He is angry that you have not more, that you might
bestow it upon him. And if you made him master of the whole world, he would
still be unthankful, and think that he had received nothing. This desire is
insatiable. It is the craving of disease; and such is the nature of the cravings of
disease.
He who has a fever can never be satisfied, but with constant desire of
drinking, is never filled, but suffers a continual thirst; so he who is mad after
wealth never knows the fulfillment of his desire; whatever is bestowed upon
him, he is still unsatisfied, and will therefore never be thankful. For he will feel
no gratitude to him, who does not give him as much as he wishes, and this no
one can ever do. And as there is no limit to his wishes, he will feel no gratitude.
Thus no one is so unthankful as the covetous, so insensible as the lover of
money. He is the enemy of all the world. He is indignant that there are men. He
would have all one vast desert, that he might have the property of all. And many