admit of change and transposition. But not so with the lion; he rules by nature
over the quadrupeds, as the eagle does over birds. The character of sovereignty
is, therefore, constantly allotted to his race; and no lion has ever been seen
deprived of it. Such a kind of sovereignty God bestowed upon us from the
beginning, and set us over all things. And not only in this respect did He confer
honour upon our nature, but also, by the very eminence of the spot in which we
were placed, fixing upon Paradise as our choice dwelling, and bestowing the gift
of reason, and an immortal soul.
4. But I would not speak of these things: for I say that such was the
abundance of God's care, that we may know His goodness, and His love towards
man, not only from the way in which He has honoured, but also from the way in
which He has punished us. And this, I especially exhort you to consider with
attention, that God is alike good, not only while He is treating us with honour
and beneficence, but also while He is punishing and chastising. And whether we
should have to carry on our contest and combat against the heathen, or against
the heretics, respecting the lovingkindness and goodness of God, we shall make
His goodness evident, not only from the cases in which He bestows honour, but
also from the cases in which He inflicts punishment. For if He is good only
while honouring us, and not good while punishing us, He were but half good.
But this is not the case. God forbid! Among men this may probably happen,
when they inflict punishments in anger and passion; but God being free from
passion, whether He exercise kindness, or whether He punish, He is alike good.
Nor less does the threat of hell serve to show His goodness, than the promise of
the kingdom. [Galatians 3:24] But how? I answer. If He had not threatened hell,
if He had not prepared punishment, there are not many who would have attained
the kingdom. For the promise of good things does not so strongly induce the
multitude to virtue; as does the threat of evil things compel by fear, and arouse
them to the care of the soul. So that, although hell be the opposite of the
kingdom of heaven, yet each has respect to the same end— the salvation of men;
the one alluring to itself, the other driving them towards its opposite, and by the

operation of fear correcting those who are carelessly disposed.
5. I do not enlarge upon this subject without reason; but because there are
many who often, when famines, and droughts, and wars take place, or when the
wrath of an Emperor overtakes them, or when any other unexpected events of
this kind happen, deceive the simpler class by saying, that these things are
unworthy of the Providence of God.
I am therefore compelled to dwell on this part of my discourse, that we may
not be beguiled by words, but that we may plainly perceive, that whether He
brings upon us a famine, or a war, or any calamity, whatsoever, He does it out of
His exceeding great care and kindness. For even those fathers, who especially
love their offspring, will forbid them the table, and inflict stripes, and punish
them by disgrace, and in endless other ways of this kind correct their children
when they are disorderly; yet are they nevertheless fathers, not only while doing
them honour, but when acting thus; yea, they are preeminently fathers when they
act thus. [Hebrews 12:9] But if men, who are frequently carried away beyond
what is meet by the force of angry feelings, are yet held to punish those whom
they love, not from cruelty and inhumanity, but from a kind care and regard;
much rather is it proper to be thus minded concerning God; who in the exceeding
abundance of His goodness, far transcends every degree of paternal fondness.
And that you may not suppose that what I say is a mere conjecture, let us, I pray
you, direct our discourse to the Scripture itself. When man, then, had been
deceived and beguiled by the wicked demon, let us observe how God treated
him, after his committing so great a sin. Did He then altogether destroy him? Yet
the reason of the thing in justice demanded this, that one who had displayed
nothing that was good, but, after enjoying so much favour, had waxed wanton
even from the very first, should be made away with, and utterly destroyed; yet
God acted not so; neither did He regard with disgust and aversion him who had
been so ungrateful towards his Benefactor, but He comes to him as a physician
comes to a sick man.
6. Do not, O beloved, pass over unthinkingly, what has just been said! But