We have given these words as they stand in the Greek text: a very different list, but equally unmeaning, is found in the

The Latin reads zonis, "zones," instead of "lives," as in the Greek.

is the redemption of the inner man. This, however, is not of a corporeal nature, for the body is
corruptible; nor is it animal, since the animal soul is the fruit of a defect, and is, as it were, the
abode of the spirit. The redemption must therefore be of a spiritual nature; for they affirm that the
inner and spiritual man is redeemed by means of knowledge, and that they, having acquired the
knowledge of all things, stand thenceforth in need of nothing else. This, then, is the true redemption.
5. Others still there are who continue to redeem persons even up to the moment of death, by
placing on their heads oil and water, or the pre-mentioned ointment with water, using at the same
time the above-named invocations, that the persons referred to may become incapable of being
seized or seen by the principalities and powers, and that their inner man may ascend on high in an
invisible manner, as if their body were left among created things in this world, while their soul is
sent forward to the Demiurge. And they instruct them, on their reaching the principalities and
powers, to make use of these words: "I am a son from the Father—the Father who had a
pre-existence, and a son in Him who is pre-existent. I have come to behold all things, both those
which belong to myself and others, although, strictly speaking, they do not belong to others, but to
Achamoth, who is female in nature, and made these things for herself. For I derive being from Him
who is pre-existent, and I come again to my own place whence I went forth." And they affirm that,
by saying these things, he escapes from the powers. He then advances to the companions of the
Demiurge, and thus addresses them:—"I am a vessel more precious than the female who formed
you. If your mother is ignorant of her own descent, I know myself, and am aware whence I am,
and I call upon the incorruptible Sophia, who is in the Father, and is the mother of your mother,
who has no father, nor any male consort; but a female springing from a female formed you, while
ignorant of her own mother, and imagining that she alone existed; but I call upon her mother." And
they declare, that when the companions of the Demiurge hear these words, they are greatly agitated,
and upbraid their origin and the race of their mother. But he goes into his own place, having thrown
[off] his chain, that is, his animal nature. These, then, are the particulars which have reached us
respecting "redemption." But since they differ so widely among themselves both as respects
doctrine and tradition, and since those of them who are recognised as being most modern make it
their effort daily to invent some new opinion, and to bring out what no one ever before thought of,
it is a difficult matter to describe all their opinions.