SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.8.

exceed in a slight degree, this may happen without prejudice to his
good faith, because in such matters a man cannot possibly decide
precisely what ought to be done. On the other hand, if the excess be
very great he cannot be ignorant of the fact; consequently he would
seem to be lacking in good faith, and is guilty of mortal sin. For it is
written (Mt. 24:48-51) that "if that evil servant shall say in his heart:
My lord is long a-coming," which shows contempt of God's
judgment, "and shall begin to strike his fellow-servants," which is a
sign of pride, "and shall eat and drink with drunkards," which
proceeds from lust, "the lord of that servant shall come in a day that
he hopeth not . . . and shall separate him," namely from the
fellowship of good men, "and appoint his portion with hypocrites,"
namely in hell.
Reply to Objection 1: This saying of Ambrose refers to the
administration not only of ecclesiastical things but also of any goods
whatever from which a man is bound, as a duty of charity, to provide
for those who are in need. But it is not possible to state definitely
when this need is such as to impose an obligation under pain of
mortal sin, as is the case in other points of detail that have to be
considered in human acts: for the decision in such matters is left to
human prudence.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above the goods of the Church have
to be employed not only for the use of the poor, but also for other
purposes. Hence if a bishop or cleric wish to deprive himself of that
which is assigned to his own use, and give it to his relations or
others, he sins not so long as he observes moderation, so, to wit,
that they cease to be in want without becoming the richer thereby.
Hence Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 30): "It is a commendable liberality
if you overlook not your kindred when you know them to be in want;
yet not so as to wish to make them rich with what you can give to the
poor."
Reply to Objection 3: The goods of churches should not all be given
to the poor, except in a case of necessity: for then, as Ambrose says
(De Offic. ii, 28), even the vessels consecrated to the divine worship
are to be sold for the ransom of prisoners, and other needs of the
poor. In such a case of necessity a cleric would sin if he chose to
maintain himself on the goods of the Church, always supposing him
to have a patrimony of his own on which to support himself.
Reply to Objection 4: The goods of the churches should be

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.8.

employed for the good of the poor. Consequently a man is to be
commended if, there being no present necessity for helping the
poor, he spends the surplus from the Church revenue, in buying
property, or lays it by for some future use connected with the Church
or the needs of the poor. But if there be a pressing need for helping
the poor, to lay by for the future is a superfluous and inordinate
saving, and is forbidden by our Lord Who said (Mt. 6:34): "Be . . . not
solicitous for the morrow."