unnumbered good things. For their over-care about expression was so excessive,
so worthy of mere sophists, or rather not even of sophists, but of silly striplings,
that even their own chief philosopher introduces his own master as greatly
ashamed of this art, and as saying to the judges, that what they hear from him
shall be spoken plainly and without premeditation, not tricked out rhetorically
nor ornamented with (fine) sentences and words; since, says he, it cannot surely
be becoming, O men, that one at my age should come before you like a lad
inventing speeches. And observe the extreme absurdity of the thing; what he has
described his master avoiding as disgraceful, unworthy of philosophy and work
for lads, this above all he himself has cultivated. So entirely were they given up
to mere love of distinction.
And as, if you uncover those sepulchers which are whitened without you
will find them full of corruption, and stench, and rotten bones; so too the
doctrines of the philosopher, if you strip them of their flowery diction, you will
see to be full of much abomination, especially when he philosophizes on the
soul, which he both honors and speaks ill of without measure. And this is the
snare of the devil, never to keep due proportion, but by excess on either hand to
lead aside those who are entangled by it into evil speaking. At one time he says,
that the soul is of the substance of God; at another, after having exalted it thus
immoderately and impiously, he exceeds again in a different way, and treats it
with insult, making it pass into swine and asses, and other animals of yet less
esteem than these.
But enough of this; or rather even this is out of measure. For if it were
possible to learn anything profitable from these things, we must have been
longer occupied with them; but if it be only to observe their indecency and
absurdity, more than requisite has been said by us already. We will therefore
leave their fables, and attach ourselves to our own doctrines, which have been
brought to us from above by the tongue of this fisherman, and which have
nothing human in them.
7. Let us then bring forward the words, having reminded you now, as I

exhorted you at the first, earnestly to attend to what is said. What then does this
Evangelist say immediately on his outset?
"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God." [John 1:1]
Do you see the great boldness and power of the words, how he speaks nothing
doubting nor conjecturing, but declaring all things plainly? For this is the
teacher's part, not to waver in anything he says, since if he who is to be a guide
to the rest require another person who shall be able to establish him with
certainty, he would be rightly ranked not among teachers, but among disciples.
But if any one say, "What can be the reason that he has neglected the first
cause, and spoken to us at once concerning the second?" we shall decline to
speak of "first" and "second," for the Divinity is above number, and the
succession of times. Wherefore we decline these expressions; but we confess
that the Father is from none, and that the Son is begotten of the Father. Yes, it
may be said, but why then does he leave the Father, and speak concerning the
Son? Why? Because the former was manifest to all, if not as Father, at least as
God; but the Only-Begotten was not known; and therefore with reason did he
immediately from the very beginning hasten to implant the knowledge of Him in
those who knew Him not.
Besides, he has not been silent as to the Father in his writings on these
points. And observe, I beg of you, his spiritual wisdom. He knows that men most
honor the eldest of beings which was before all, and account this to be God.
Wherefore from this point first he makes his beginning, and as he advances,
declares that God is, and does not like Plato assert, sometimes that He is
intellect, sometimes that He is soul; for these things are far removed from that
divine and unmixed Nature which has nothing common with us, but is separated
from any fellowship with created things, I mean as to substance, though not as to
relation.
And for this reason he calls Him "The Word." For since he is about to teach
that this "Word" is the only-begotten Son of God, in order that no one may
imagine that His generation is passible, by giving Him the appellation of "The