by chance, because it necessarily follows upon such an agent, when such agent suffers
this failure of power either always or frequently: but it will be by chance, if the failure
rarely accompanies such an agent. -- Coming to voluntary agents, intention in them
must be of some particular good, if action is to follow: for universal considerations of
themselves do not move the will, unless there be added the consideration of the
particular circumstances under which the action is to take place. If then the good that is
intended has conjoined with it the privation of rational good either always or frequently,
there follows moral evil, and that not by chance, as is clear in his case who wishes to
cohabit with a woman for pleasure, while the inordination of adultery is annexed to that
pleasure: in that case the evil of adultery does not ensue by chance: but it would be an
evil happening by chance, if upon the thing intended there followed some exceptional
misadventure, as when one aiming at a bird kills a man. That goods of this sort, upon
which privations of rational good follow, are so generally intended, arises from the
practice of most men living according to sense, which they do because sensible things
are more manifest to us, and make more effectual motives in the particular
circumstances in which our action is cast; and many such goods are attended with
privation of rational good.
Arg. 2. Aristotle (Eth. Nic., III, vii) expressly says that wickedness is voluntary, and
proves it from the fact that men do unjust acts voluntarily: but, he adds, it is irrational to
pretend that a man voluntarily acting unjustly does not wish to be unjust, or voluntarily
committing rape does not wish to be incontinent; and that is why legislators punish
wicked men as voluntary evil-doers. It seems then that evil is not irrespective of will or
intention.
Reply. Though evil be beside the intention, it is still voluntary, not as it is in itself, but
incidentally. The object of intention is the final end, willed for its own sake: but the object
of volition is also that which is willed for the sake of something else, though absolutely it
would not be willed, -- as one throws cargo into the sea to save the ship, not
intending the casting away of the cargo, but the safety of the vessel; and yet willing the
casting away of the cargo, not simply and absolutely, but for the sake of safety. In like
manner, for the gaining of some sensible good, one wills to do an inordinate action, not
intending the inordinateness, nor willing it simply, but for that purpose. And therefore in
this way wickedness and sin are said to be voluntary, like the casting away of cargo at
sea.
Arg. 3. Every process of nature serves as an end intended by nature. But destruction is
as much a natural change as production: therefore its end, which is a privation and
counts as evil, is intended by nature as much as form and goodness, which are the end
of production.
Reply. From what has been said it appears that what is simply evil is altogether contrary
to intention in the works of nature, as are monstrous births: but what is not simply evil,
but only evil in a particular relation, is not intended by nature in itself, but incidentally.