proper place, and not encroach on another which in nowise appertains to him.
You put the members together, He supplies them from above. For as there are in
the body such recipient organs, as we have seen, so is it also with the Spirit, the
whole root or source being from above. For example, the heart is the recipient of
the breath, the liver of the blood, the spleen of the bile, and the other organs,
some of one thing, others of another, but all these have their source from the
brain. So also has God done, highly honoring man, and being unwilling to be far
from him, He has made Himself indeed the source of his dependence, and has
constituted them fellow-workers with Himself; and some He has appointed to
one office, and others to another. For example, the Apostle is the most vital
vessel of the whole body, receiving everything from Him; so that He makes
eternal life to run through them to all, as through veins and arteries, I mean
through their discourse. The Prophet foretells things to come, while He alone
orders the same; You put the members together, but He supplies them with life,
"For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry." Love builds up,
and makes men cleave one to another, and be fastened and fitted together.
Moral. If therefore we desire to have the benefit of that Spirit which is from
the Head, let us cleave one to another. For there are two kinds of separation from
the body of the Church; the one, when we wax cold in love, the other, when we
dare commit things unworthy of our belonging to that body; for in either way we
cut ourselves off from the "fullness of Christ." But if we are appointed to build
up others also, what shall not be done to them who are first to make division?
Nothing will so avail to divide the Church as love of power. Nothing so
provokes God's anger as the division of the Church. Yea, though we have
achieved ten thousand glorious acts, yet shall we, if we cut to pieces the fullness
of the Church, suffer punishment no less sore than they who mangled His body.
For that indeed was brought to pass for the benefit of the world, even though it
was done with no such intention; whereas this produces no advantage in any
case, but the injury is excessive. These remarks I am addressing not to the
governors only, but also to the governed. Now a certain holy man said what

might seem to be a bold thing; yet, nevertheless, he spoke it out. What then is
this? He said, that not even the blood of martyrdom can wash out this sin. For
tell me for what do you suffer as a martyr? Is it not for the glory of Christ? Thou
then that yieldest up your life for Christ's sake, how do you lay waste the
Church, for whose sake Christ yielded up His life? Hear what Paul says, "I am
not meet to be called an Apostle [1 Corinthians 15:9], because I persecuted the
Church of God and made havoc of it." [Galatians 1:13] This injury is not less
than that received at the hands of enemies, nay, it is far greater. For that indeed
renders her even more glorious, whereas this, when she is warred upon by her
own children, disgraces her even before her enemies. Because it seems to them a
great mark of hypocrisy, that those who have been born in her, and nurtured in
her bosom, and have learned perfectly her secrets, that these should of a sudden
change, and do her enemies' work.
I mean these remarks for those who give themselves up indiscriminately to
the men who are dividing the Church. For if on the one hand those men have
doctrines also contrary to ours, then on that account further it is not right to mix
with them: if, on the other hand, they hold the same opinions, the reason for not
mixing with them is greater still. And why so? Because then the disease is from
lust of authority. Do you not know what was the fate of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram? [Numbers 16:1-35] Of them only did I say? Was it not also of them that
were with them? What will you say? Shall it be said, "Their faith is the same,
they are orthodox as well as we"? If so, why then are they not with us? There is
"one Lord, one faith, one baptism." If their cause is right, then is ours wrong; if
ours is right, then is theirs wrong. "Children," says he, "tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind." Tell me, do you think this is enough, to say that
they are orthodox? Is then the ordination of clergy past and done away? And
what is the advantage of other things, if this be not strictly observed? For as we
must needs contend for the faith; so must we for this also. For if it is lawful for
any one, according to the phrase of them of old, "to fill his hands," and to
become a priest, let all approach to minister. In vain has this altar been raised, in