discussion on the Law. And there is another aim in his here styling them His
epistle. For above as commending him, he called them an epistle; but here an
epistle of Christ, as having the Law of God written in them. For what things God
wished to declare to all and to you, these are written in your hearts. But it was
we who prepared you to receive the writing. For just as Moses hewed the stones
and tables, so we, your souls. Whence he says,
"Ministered by us."
Yet in this they were on an equality; for the former were written on by God,
and these by the Spirit. Where then is the difference?
"Written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of
stone, but in tables that are hearts of flesh."
Wide as the difference between the Spirit and ink, and a stony table and a
fleshy, so wide is that between these and those; consequently between
themselves who ministered, and him who ministered to them. Yet because it was
a great thing he had uttered, he therefore quickly checks himself, saying,

2 Corinthians 3:4
"And such confidence have we through Christ to Godward,"
And again refers all to God: for it is Christ, says he, Who is the Author of
these things to us.

2 Corinthians 3:5-6
"Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to account any thing as from
ourselves."
See again, yet another corrective. For he possesses this virtue, humility I
mean, in singular perfection. Wherefore whenever he says any thing great of
himself, he makes all diligence to soften down extremely and by every means,
what he has said. And so he does in this place also, saying, "Not that we are
sufficient of ourselves to account any thing as from ourselves:" that is, I said not,
"We have confidence," as though part were ours and part God's; but I refer and
ascribe the whole to Him.
"For our sufficiency is from God; who also made us sufficient as ministers
of a new covenant."
What means, "made us sufficient?" Made us able and fitting. And it is not a
little thing to be the bearer to the world of such tables and letters, greater far than
the former. Whence also he added,
"Not of the letter, but of the spirit." See again another difference. What
then? Was not that Law spiritual? How then says he, "We know that the Law is
spiritual?" [Romans 7:14] Spiritual indeed, but it bestowed not a spirit. For
Moses bare not a spirit, but letters; but we have been entrusted with the giving of
a spirit. Whence also in further completion of this [contrast,] he says,
"For the letter kills, but the spirit gives life."
Yet these things he says not absolutely ; but in allusion to those who prided
themselves upon the things of Judaism. And by "letter" here he means the Law
which punishes them that transgress; but by "spirit" the grace which through
Baptism gives life to them who by sins were made dead. For having mentioned
the difference arising from the nature of the tables, he does not dwell upon it, but
rapidly passing it by, bestows more labor upon this, which most enabled him to