THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.3.

adoration of Christ's humanity is the adoration of "latria." Secondly,
the adoration of Christ's humanity may be taken as given by reason
of its being perfected with every gift of grace. And so in this sense
the adoration of Christ's humanity is the adoration not of "latria" but
of "dulia." So that one and the same Person of Christ is adored with
"latria" on account of His Divinity, and with "dulia" on account of His
perfect humanity.
Nor is this unfitting. For the honor of "latria" is due to God the Father
Himself on account of His Godhead; and the honor of "dulia" on
account of the dominion by which He rules over creatures.
Wherefore on Ps. 7:1, "O Lord my God, in Thee have I hoped," a
gloss says: "Lord of all by power, to Whom 'dulia' is due: God of all
by creation, to Whom 'latria' is due."
Reply to Objection 1: That gloss is not to be understood as though
the flesh of Christ were adored separately from its Godhead: for this
could happen only, if there were one hypostasis of God, and another
of man. But since, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 3): "If by a
subtle distinction you divide what is seen from what is understood, it
cannot be adored because it is a creature"---that is, with adoration of
"latria." And then thus understood as distinct from the Word of God,
it should be adored with the adoration of "dulia"; not any kind of
"dulia," such as is given to other creatures, but with a certain higher
adoration, which is called "hyperdulia."
Hence appear the answers to the second and third objections.
Because the adoration of "latria" is not given to Christ's humanity in
respect of itself; but in respect of the Godhead to which it is united,
by reason of which Christ is not less than the Father.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the image of Christ should be adored

with the adoration of "latria"?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's image should not be adored
with the adoration of "latria." For it is written (Ex. 20:4): "Thou shalt
not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likeness of anything." But
no adoration should be given against the commandment of God.
Therefore Christ's image should not be adored with the adoration of
"latria."
Objection 2: Further, we should have nothing in common with the
works of the Gentiles, as the Apostle says (Eph. 5:11). But the
Gentiles are reproached principally for that "they changed the glory
of the incorruptible God into the likeness of the image of a
corruptible man," as is written (Rm. 1:23). Therefore Christ's image is
not to be adored with the adoration of "latria."
Objection 3: Further, to Christ the adoration of "latria" is due by
reason of His Godhead, not of His humanity. But the adoration of
"latria" is not due to the image of His Godhead, which is imprinted
on the rational soul. Much less, therefore, is it due to the material
image which represents the humanity of Christ Himself.
Objection 4: Further, it seems that nothing should be done in the
Divine worship that is not instituted by God; wherefore the Apostle (1
Cor. 11:23) when about to lay down the doctrine of the sacrifice of
the Church, says: "I have received of the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you." But Scripture does not lay down anything
concerning the adoration of images. Therefore Christ's image is not
to be adored with the adoration of "latria."
On the contrary, Damascene (De Fide Orth. iv, 16) quotes Basil as
saying: "The honor given to an image reaches to the prototype," i.e.
the exemplar. But the exemplar itself---namely, Christ---is to be
adored with the adoration of "latria"; therefore also His image.
I answer that, As the Philosopher says (De Memor. et Remin. i), there
is a twofold movement of the mind towards an image: one indeed
towards the image itself as a certain thing; another, towards the
image in so far as it is the image of something else. And between
these movements there is this difference; that the former, by which