The first part is also divided into two sections. In the first, he proposes the doctrine of the
Catholic faith in regard to the unity of the divine essence. Secondly, he investigates the truth of
the doctrine proposed when he says: "Therefore..." In the first section he treats of two things.
First, he represents the condition of that faith whose doctrine he intends to explain. Secondly, he
sets forth the doctrine of the faith he has described concerning this proposition, saying: "The
belief of this religion concerning the Trinity."

He describes this religion in a twofold manner, namely, by comparison with heretical
cults, which it excels, and also in its own name since it is called catholic or universal. He says,
therefore, that there are many, that is, many sects of diverse heresies, who make unlawful claims,
since they unduly attribute to themselves the honor of the Christian religion, that is, the honor
which ought to be paid to it: namely, that all others should be subject to it. 1 John 5:4: "This is
the victory that overcomes the world, our faith." Or, again, they claim the dignity which belongs
to the Christian religion in that it manifests the glory of God by believing those truths which have
been divinely revealed.

"But that form of faith has supreme authority, and has it exclusively." Here he adds the
two things that make it distinct both according to truth and according to reputation. Now
according to the truth of the matter, heretics are not Christians, since they cut themselves off from
the teachings of Christ, and in this respect the Catholic faith alone is valid. But according to
appearances and in the opinion of men, heretics are called Christians because they do indeed still,
at least in word, confess the name of Christ; and according to this aspect, the Catholic faith is not
the only one, but holds the place of greater authority.

That this religion is the more common and the more widely diffused is understood when he says,
"is called catholic or universal." Now this is the same thing; for catholic in the Greek, means the
same as the Latin universal. For the use of this name, he assigns two reasons, saying: "On
account of the precepts of its universal rules," for the precepts which the Catholic religion sets
forth are not to be observed by one race alone, but by all: and in this respect it differs especially
from the Law of Moses which gave precepts to one people alone. Likewise even individual
heresies propose rules that are accommodated to their own members only; while the Catholic
faith, having the care of all, gives its precepts to all: not to the unmarried alone, as do the
Manichaeans, but also to the married; not to the innocent alone, as do the Novatians, but to
sinners as well, for whom that sect would make salvation impossible. Wherefore he adds: "the
authority of this religion is evident because of its universal rules," on account of which all ought
to be subject to it.