SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.5.

rectitude of the reason which is called truth is imprinted on the will
on account of its nighness to the reason, this imprint retains the
name of truth; and hence it is that justice sometimes goes by the
name of truth.
Reply to Objection 2: The will is borne towards its object
consequently on the apprehension of reason: wherefore, since the
reason directs one thing in relation to another, the will can will one
thing in relation to another, and this belongs to justice.
Reply to Objection 3: Not only the irascible and concupiscible parts
are "rational by participation," but the entire "appetitive" faculty, as
stated in Ethic. i, 13, because all appetite is subject to reason. Now
the will is contained in the appetitive faculty, wherefore it can be the
subject of moral virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether justice is a general virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not a general virtue. For
justice is specified with the other virtues, according to Wis. 8:7, "She
teacheth temperance and prudence, and justice, and fortitude." Now
the "general" is not specified or reckoned together with the species
contained under the same "general." Therefore justice is not a
general virtue.
Objection 2: Further, as justice is accounted a cardinal virtue, so are
temperance and fortitude. Now neither temperance nor fortitude is
reckoned to be a general virtue. Therefore neither should justice in
any way be reckoned a general virtue.
Objection 3: Further, justice is always towards others, as stated
above (Article 2). But a sin committed against one's neighbor cannot
be a general sin, because it is condivided with sin committed against
oneself. Therefore neither is justice a general virtue.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that "justice is
every virtue."
I answer that, Justice, as stated above (Article 2) directs man in his
relations with other men. Now this may happen in two ways: first as
regards his relation with individuals, secondly as regards his
relations with others in general, in so far as a man who serves a
community, serves all those who are included in that community.
Accordingly justice in its proper acceptation can be directed to
another in both these senses. Now it is evident that all who are
included in a community, stand in relation to that community as
parts to a whole; while a part, as such, belongs to a whole, so that
whatever is the good of a part can be directed to the good of the
whole. It follows therefore that the good of any virtue, whether such
virtue direct man in relation to himself, or in relation to certain other
individual persons, is referable to the common good, to which
justice directs: so that all acts of virtue can pertain to justice, in so
far as it directs man to the common good. It is in this sense that
justice is called a general virtue. And since it belongs to the law to
direct to the common good, as stated above (FS, Question 90, Article
2), it follows that the justice which is in this way styled general, is
called "legal justice," because thereby man is in harmony with the