37. When, however, there is question of another conjectural opinion, namely polygenism, the children
of the Church by no means enjoy such liberty. For the faithful cannot embrace that opinion which
maintains that either after Adam there existed on this earth true men who did not take their origin
through natural generation from him as from the first parent of all, or that Adam represents a certain
number of first parents. Now it is in no way apparent how such an opinion can be reconciled with that
which the sources of revealed truth and the documents of the Teaching Authority of the Church
propose with regard to original sin, which proceeds from a sin actually committed by an individual
Adam and which, through generation, is passed on to all and is in everyone as his own.

38. Just as in the biological and anthropological sciences, so also in the historical sciences there are
those who boldly transgress the limits and safeguards established by the Church. In a particular way
must be deplored a certain too free interpretation of the historical books of the Old Testament. Those
who favor this system, in order to defend their cause, wrongly refer to the Letter which was sent not
long ago to the Archbishop of Paris by the Pontifical Commission on Biblical Studies. This letter, in
fact, clearly points out that the first eleven chapters of Genesis, although properly speaking not
conforming to the historical method used by the best Greek and Latin writers or by competent authors
of our time, do nevertheless pertain to history in a true sense, which however must be further studied
and determined by exegetes; the same chapters, (the Letter points out), in simple and metaphorical
language adapted to the mentality of a people but little cultured, both state the principal truths which
are fundamental for our salvation, and also give a popular description of the origin of the human race
and the chosen people. If, however, the ancient sacred writers have taken anything from popular
narrations (and this may be conceded), it must never be forgotten that they did so with the help of
divine inspiration, through which they were rendered immune from any error in selecting and
evaluating those documents.

39. Therefore, whatever of the popular narrations have been inserted into the Sacred Scriptures must
in no way be considered on a par with myths or other such things, which are more the product of an
extravagant imagination than of that striving for truth and simplicity which in the Sacred Books, also
of the Old Testament, is so apparent that our ancient sacred writers must be admitted to be clearly
superior to the ancient profane writers.

40. Truly, we are aware that the majority of Catholic doctors, the fruit of whose studies is being
gathered in universities, in seminaries and in the colleges of religious, are far removed from those
errors which today, whether through a desire for novelty or through a certain immoderate zeal for the
apostolate, are being spread either openly or covertly. But we know also that such new opinions can
entice the incautious; and therefore we prefer to withstand the very beginnings rather than to
administer the medicine after the disease has grown inveterate.