## Homily 18 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 6:13-16
"I give you charge in the sight of God, Who quickens all things, and before
Christ Jesus, Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession; that thou
keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ: which in his times He shall show, Who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; Who only has immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; Whom no man has seen,
nor can see; to Whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen."
Again he calls God to witness, as he had done a little before, at once to
increase his disciple's awe, and to secure his safety, and to show that these were
not human commandments, that receiving the commandment as from the Lord
Himself, and ever bearing in mind the Witness before Whom he heard it, he may
have it more fearfully impressed upon his mind.
"I charge you," he says, "before God, Who quickens all things."
Here is at once consolation in the dangers which awaited him, and a
remembrance of the resurrection awakened in him.
"And before Jesus Christ, Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession."
The exhortation again is derived from the example of his Master, and what
he means is this; as He had done, so ought you to do, for for this cause He
"witnessed" [1 Peter 2:21], that we might tread in His steps.
"A good confession." What he does in his Epistle to the Hebrews,—
"Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our faith; Who for the joy that
was set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God. For consider Him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against Himself, lest you be wearied and faint in your

minds" [Hebrews 12:2-3]—that he now does to his disciple Timothy. As if he
had said, Fear not death, since you are the servant of God, Who can give life to
all things.
But to what "good confession" does he allude? To that which He made
when Pilate asked, "Are you a King?" "To this end," He said, "was I born." And
again, "I came, that I might bear witness to the Truth. Behold, these have heard
Me." [John 18:37] He may mean this, or that when asked, "Are you the Son of
God?" He answered, "You say, that I am (the Son of God)." [Luke 22:70] And
many other testimonies and confessions did He make.
Ver. 14. "That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ."
That is, till your end, your departure hence, though he does not so express
it, but that he may the more arouse him, says, "till His appearing." But what is
"to keep the commandment without spot"? To contract no defilement, either of
doctrine or of life.
Ver. 15. "Which in His times He shall show, Who is the blessed and only
Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords, Who only has immortality, dwelling
in the light which no man can approach unto."
Of whom are these things said? Of the Father, or of the Son? Of the Son,
undoubtedly: and it is said for the consolation of Timothy, that he may not fear
nor stand in awe of the kings of the earth.
"In His times," that is, the due and fitting times, that he may not be
impatient, because it has not yet come. And whence is it manifest, that He will
show it? Because He is the Potentate, the "only Potentate." He then will show it,
Who is "blessed," nay blessedness itself; and this is said, to show that in that
appearing there is nothing painful or uneasy.
But he says, "only," either in contradistinction to men, or because He was
unoriginated, or as we sometimes speak of a man whom we wish to extol.
"Who only has immortality." What then? Has not the Son immortality? Is
He not immortality itself? How should not He, who is of the same substance