But let us examine the nature even of the meats themselves. For there
indeed it is necessary to burst one's self with the large quantity of wine, even
against one's will, but here none who is disinclined need eat or drink. So that
there indeed the pleasure arising from the quality of the food is cancelled by the
dishonor which precedes, and the discomfort which follows the surfeit. For not
less than hunger does surfeiting destroy and rack our bodies; but even far more
grievously; and whomsoever you like to give me, I shall more easily destroy by
bursting him with surfeit than by hunger. For thus the latter is easier to be borne
than the other, for one might indeed endure hunger for twenty days, but
surfeiting not for as many as two only. And the country people who are
perpetually struggling with the one, are healthy, and need no physicians; but the
other, surfeiting I mean, none can endure without perpetually calling in
physicians; yea, rather, its tyranny has often baffled even their attempt to rescue.
So far then as pleasure is concerned, this [table of mine] has the advantage.
For if honor has more pleasure than dishonor, if authority than subjection, and if
manly confidence than trembling and fear, and if enjoyment of what is enough,
than to be plunged out of depth in the tide of luxury; on the score of pleasure this
table is better than the other. It is besides better in regard of expense; for the
other is expensive, but this, not so.
But what? Is it then to the guests alone that this table is the more
pleasurable, or brings it more pleasure than the other to him who invites them, as
well? For this is what we are enquiring after rather. Now he who invites those
makes preparation many days before, and is forced to have trouble and anxious
thoughts and cares, neither sleeping by night, nor resting by day; but forming
with himself many plans, conversing with cooks, confectioners, deckers of
tables. Then when the very day has come, one may see him in greater fear than
those who are going to fight a boxing match, lest anything should turn out other
than was expected, lest he be shot with the glance of envy, lest he thereby
procure himself a multitude of accusers. But the other escapes all this anxious
thought and trouble by extemporizing his table, and not being careful about it for

many days before. And then, truly, after this, the former indeed has straightway
lost the grateful return; but the other has God for his Debtor; and is nourished
with good hopes, being every day feasted from off that table. For the meats
indeed are spent, but the grateful thought is never spent, but every day he
rejoices and exults more than they that are gorged with their excess of wine. For
nothing does so nourish the soul as a virtuous hope, and the expectation of good
things.
But now let us consider what follows. There indeed are flutes, and harps,
and pipes; but here is no music of sounds unsuitable; but what? hymns, singing
of psalms. There indeed the Demons are hymned; but here, the Lord of all, God.
Do you see with what gratitude this one abounds, with what ingratitude and
insensibility that? For, tell me, when God has nourished you with His good
things, and when you ought to give Him thanks after being fed, do you even
introduce the Demons? For these songs to the lyre, are none other than songs to
Demons. When you ought to say, "Blessed are You, O Lord, that You have
nourished me with Your good things," do you like a worthless dog not even so
much as remember Him, but, over and above, introducest the Demons? Nay
rather, dogs, whether they receive anything or not, fawn upon those they know,
but thou dost not even this. The dog, although he receives nothing, fawns upon
his master; but thou, even when you have received, barkest at Him. Again, the
dog, even though he be well treated by a stranger, not even so will be reconciled
of his hatred of him, nor be enticed on to be friends with him: but thou, even
though suffering mischief incalculable from the Demons, introducest them at
your feasts. So that, in two ways, you are worse than the dog. And the mention I
have now made of dogs is happy, in regard of those who give thanks then only
when they receive a benefit. Take shame, I pray you, at the dogs, which when
famishing still fawn upon their masters. But you, if you have haply heard that the
Demon has cured anyone, straightway forsakest your Master; O more
unreasoning than the dogs!
But, says one, the harlots are a pleasure to look upon. What sort of pleasure