in God in our idea, so, "to become" or "to be made" are applied to
God only in idea, with no change in Him, as for instance when we
say, "Lord, Thou art become our refuge" (Ps. 89:1).
Reply to Objection 3: The operation of the intellect and the will is in
the operator, therefore names signifying relations following upon the
action of the intellect or will, are applied to God from eternity;
whereas those following upon the actions proceeding according to
our mode of thinking to external effects are applied to God
temporally, as "Saviour," "Creator," and the like.
Reply to Objection 4: Relations signified by these names which are
applied to God temporally, are in God only in idea; but the opposite
relations in creatures are real. Nor is it incongruous that God should
be denominated from relations really existing in the thing, yet so that
the opposite relations in God should also be understood by us at the
same time; in the sense that God is spoken of relatively to the
creature, inasmuch as the creature is related to Him: thus the
Philosopher says (Metaph. v) that the object is said to be knowable
relatively because knowledge relates to it.
Reply to Objection 5: Since God is related to the creature for the
reason that the creature is related to Him: and since the relation of
subjection is real in the creature, it follows that God is Lord not in
idea only, but in reality; for He is called Lord according to the
manner in which the creature is subject to Him.
Reply to Objection 6: To know whether relations are simultaneous by
nature or otherwise, it is not necessary by nature or otherwise of
things to which they belong but the meaning of the relations
themselves. For if one in its idea includes another, and vice versa,
then they are simultaneous by nature: as double and half, father and
son, and the like. But if one in its idea includes another, and not vice
versa, they are not simultaneous by nature. This applies to science
and its object; for the object knowable is considered as a
potentiality, and the science as a habit, or as an act. Hence the
knowable object in its mode of signification exists before science,
but if the same object is considered in act, then it is simultaneous
with science in act; for the object known is nothing as such unless it
is known. Thus, though God is prior to the creature, still because the
signification of Lord includes the idea of a servant and vice versa,
these two relative terms, "Lord" and "servant," are simultaneous by
nature. Hence, God was not "Lord" until He had a creature subject to

Himself.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether this name "God" is a name of the nature?

Objection 1: It seems that this name, "God," is not a name of the
nature. For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. 1) that "God Theos is so
called from the theein and to cherish all things; or from the aithein,
that is to burn, for our God is a fire consuming all malice; or from
theasthai, which means to consider all things." But all these names
belong to operation. Therefore this name "God" signifies His
operation and not His nature.
Objection 2: Further, a thing is named by us as we know it. But the
divine nature is unknown to us. Therefore this name "God" does not
signify the divine nature.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Fide i) that "God" is a name of
the nature.
I answer that, Whence a name is imposed, and what the name
signifies are not always the same thing. For as we know substance
from its properties and operations, so we name substance
sometimes for its operation, or its property; e.g. we name the
substance of a stone from its act, as for instance that it hurts the
foot [loedit pedem]; but still this name is not meant to signify the
particular action, but the stone's substance. The things, on the other
hand, known to us in themselves, such as heat, cold, whiteness and
the like, are not named from other things. Hence as regards such
things the meaning of the name and its source are the same.
Because therefore God is not known to us in His nature, but is made
known to us from His operations or effects, we name Him from
these, as said in Article 1; hence this name "God" is a name of
operation so far as relates to the source of its meaning. For this
name is imposed from His universal providence over all things;
since all who speak of God intend to name God as exercising
providence over all; hence Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ii), "The Deity
watches over all with perfect providence and goodness." But taken
from this operation, this name "God" is imposed to signify the divine
nature.
Reply to Objection 1: All that Damascene says refers to providence;
which is the source of the signification of the name "God."