SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.16.

thou hast ceased asking." Since, however, a man cannot condignly
merit eternal life for another, as stated above (FS, Question 114,
Article 6), it follows that sometimes one cannot condignly merit for
another things that pertain to eternal life. For this reason we are not
always heard when we pray for others, as stated above (Article 7, ad
2,3). Hence it is that four conditions are laid down; namely, to
ask---"for ourselves---things necessary for salvation---piously--perseveringly"; when all these four concur, we always obtain what
we ask for.
Reply to Objection 3: Prayer depends chiefly on faith, not for its
efficacy in meriting, because thus it depends chiefly on charity, but
for its efficacy in impetrating, because it is through faith that man
comes to know of God's omnipotence and mercy, which are the
source whence prayer impetrates what it asks for.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.17.

### ARTICLE 16. Whether sinners impetrate anything from God by

their prayers?
Objection 1: It would seem that sinners impetrate nothing from God
by their prayers. It is written (Jn. 9:31): "We know that God doth not
hear sinners"; and this agrees with the saying of Prov. 28:9, "He that
turneth away his ears from hearing the law, his prayer shall be an
abomination." Now an abominable prayer impetrates nothing from
God. Therefore sinners impetrate nothing from God.
Objection 2: Further, the just impetrate from God what they merit, as
stated above (Article 15, ad 2). But sinners cannot merit anything
since they lack grace and charity which is the "power of godliness,"
according to a gloss on 2 Tim. 3:5, "Having an appearance indeed of
godliness, but denying the power thereof." and so their prayer is
impious, and yet piety it required in order that prayer may be
impetrative, as stated above (Article 15, ad 2). Therefore sinners
impetrate nothing by their prayers.
Objection 3: Further, Chrysostom [Hom. xiv in the Opus
Imperfectum] says: "The Father is unwilling to hear the prayer which
the Son has not inspired." Now in the prayer inspired by Christ we
say: "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass
against us": and sinners do not fulfil this. Therefore either they lie in
saying this, and so are unworthy to be heard, or, if they do not say it,
they are not heard, because they do not observe the form of prayer
instituted by Christ.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Tract. xliv, super Joan.): "If God
were not to hear sinners, the publican would have vainly said: Lord,
be merciful to me a sinner"; and Chrysostom [Hom. xviii of the same
Opus Imperfectum] says: "Everyone that asketh shall receive, that is
to say whether he be righteous or sinful."
I answer that, In the sinner, two things are to be considered: his
nature which God loves, and the sin which He hates. Accordingly
when a sinner prays for something as sinner, i.e. in accordance with
a sinful desire, God hears him not through mercy but sometimes
through vengeance when He allows the sinner to fall yet deeper into
sin. For "God refuses in mercy what He grants in anger," as
Augustine declares (Tract. lxxiii in Joan.). On the other hand God