SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.7.

this precept that man should be entirely united to Him, and this will
be realized in heaven, when God will be "all in all," according to 1
Cor. 15:28. Hence this precept will be observed fully and perfectly in
heaven; yet it is fulfilled, though imperfectly, on the way.
Nevertheless on the way one man will fulfil it more perfectly than
another, and so much the more, as he approaches by some kind of
likeness to the perfection of heaven.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument proves that the precept can be
fulfilled after a fashion on the way, but not perfectly.
Reply to Objection 2: Even as the soldier who fights legitimately
without conquering is not blamed nor deserves to be punished for
this, so too he that does not fulfil this precept on the way, but does
nothing against the love of God, does not sin mortally.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Perfect. Justit. viii),
"why should not this perfection be prescribed to man, although no
man attains it in this life? For one cannot run straight unless one
knows whither to run. And how would one know this if no precept
pointed it out."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the precept of love of our neighbor is

fittingly expressed?
Objection 1: It would seem that the precept of the love of our
neighbor is unfittingly expressed. For the love of charity extends to
all men, even to our enemies, as may be seen in Mt. 5:44. But the
word "neighbor" denotes a kind of "nighness" which does not seem
to exist towards all men. Therefore it seems that this precept is
unfittingly expressed.
Objection 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. ix, 8) "the
origin of our friendly relations with others lies in our relation to
ourselves," whence it seems to follow that love of self is the origin of
one's love for one's neighbor. Now the principle is greater than that
which results from it. Therefore man ought not to love his neighbor
as himself.
Objection 3: Further, man loves himself, but not his neighbor,
naturally. Therefore it is unfitting that he should be commanded to
love his neighbor as himself.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 22:39): "The second"
commandment "is like to this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself."
I answer that, This precept is fittingly expressed, for it indicates both
the reason for loving and the mode of love. The reason for loving is
indicated in the word "neighbor," because the reason why we ought
to love others out of charity is because they are nigh to us, both as
to the natural image of God, and as to the capacity for glory. Nor
does it matter whether we say "neighbor," or "brother" according to
1 Jn. 4:21, or "friend," according to Lev. 19:18, because all these
words express the same affinity.
The mode of love is indicated in the words "as thyself." This does
not mean that a man must love his neighbor equally as himself, but
in like manner as himself, and this in three ways. First, as regards
the end, namely, that he should love his neighbor for God's sake,
even as he loves himself for God's sake, so that his love for his
neighbor is a "holy" love. Secondly, as regards the rule of love,
namely, that a man should not give way to his neighbor in evil, but