rather what souls is it not worth one's while to give up? At present if any one
were to lead you into the palace, and in presence of all were to give you an
opportunity of conversing with the king, and make you sit at his table, and join
in his fare, you would call yourself the happiest of men. But when you are to go
up to Heaven, and stand by the King of the universe Himself, and to vie with
angels in brightness, and to enjoy even that unutterable glory, do you hesitate
whether you ought to give up money? Whereas if you had to put off life itself,
you ought to leap and exult, and mount on wings of pleasure. But you, that you
may get an office ([ἀ] [ρχὴν]), as a place to pillage from (for call a thing of this
sort gain, I cannot), put all you have to hazard, and after borrowing of others,
will, if need be, pawn your wife and children too without hesitation.
But when the kingdom of Heaven is set before you, that office ([ἀ] [ρχἥς])
which has none to supersede you in it, and God bids you take not a part of a
corner of the earth, but the whole of Heaven entirely, are you hesitating, and
reluctant, and gaping after money, and forgetful that if the parts of that Heaven
which we see are so fair and delightful, how greatly so must the upper Heaven
be, and the Heaven of Heaven? But since we have as yet no means of seeing this
with our bodily eyes, ascend in your thought, and standing above this Heaven,
look up unto that Heaven beyond this, into that height without a bound, into that
Light surcharged with awe, into the crowds of the Angels, into the endless ranks
of Archangels, into the rest of the incorporeal Powers. And then lay hold again
of the image (cf. Plat. Rep. vii. p. 516) thereof we have, after coming down from
above, and make a sketch of the estate of a king with us, as his men in gold
armor, and his pairs of white mules proudly decked with gold, and his chariots
set with jewels and his snow-like cushions ([στρωμνὴν] Poll. x. 41), and the
spangles that flutter about the chariot, and the dragons shaped out in the silken
hangings, and the shields with their gold bosses, and the straps that reach up
from these to the rim of them through so many gems, and the horses with the
gilded trappings and the gold bits. But when we see the king we immediately
lose sight of all these. For he alone turns our eyes to him, and to the purple robe,

and the diadem, and the throne, and the clasp, and the shoes, all that splendor of
his appearance. After gathering all these things together then with accuracy, then
again remove your thoughts from these things to things above, and to that awful
day in which Christ is coming. For then you will not see any pairs of mules, nor
golden chariots, nor dragons and shields, but things that are big with a mighty
awe, and strike such amazement that the very incorporeal Powers are astonished.
For the "powers of the Heavens," He says, "shall be shaken." [Matthew 24:29]
Then is the whole Heaven thrown open, and the gates of those concaves unfold
themselves, and the Only-begotten Son of God comes down, not with twenty,
not with a hundred men for His bodyguard, but with thousands, ten thousands of
Angels and Archangels, Cherubim and Seraphim, and other Powers, and with
fear and trembling shall everything be filled, whiles the earth is bursting itself
up, and the men that ever were born, from Adam's birth up to that day, are rising
from the earth, and all are caught up; [1 Thessalonians 4:17] when Himself
appears with such great glory as that the sun, and the moon, and all light
whatever, is cast into the shade, being outshone by that radiance. What language
is to set before us that blessedness, brightness, glory? Alas! My soul. For
weeping comes upon me and great groaning, as I reflect what good things we
have fallen from, what blessedness we are estranged from. For estranged we are
(I am now speaking of my own case still), unless we do some great and
astonishing work; speak not then of hell to me now, for more grievous than any
hell is the fall from this glory, and worse than punishments unnumbered the
estrangement from that lot. But still we are gaping after this present world, and
we take not thought of the devil's cunning, who by little things bereaves us of
those great ones, and gives us clay that he may snatch from us gold, or rather
that he may snatch Heaven from us, and shows us a shadow that he may
dispossess us of the reality, and puts phantoms before us in dreams (for such is
the wealth of this world), that at daybreak he may prove us the poorest of men.
Laying these things to heart, late though it be, let us fly from this craft, and pass
to the side of things to come. For we cannot say that we were ignorant how