point Christ stopped His discourse with him, allowing him to consider in private
what had been said; and not choosing to pour forth all at once, having cast seed
into fertile ground, He then leaves it to shoot at leisure. And this He has shown
in another place, where He says, "The kingdom of heaven is like to a man that
sows good seed, but while he slept, his enemy comes, and sows tares among the
wheat."

John 2:1-2
"On the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. And Jesus was called
to the marriage. And the mother of Jesus was there, and His brethren."
I said before that He was best known in Galilee; therefore they invite Him
to the marriage, and He comes; for He looked not to His own honor, but to our
benefit. He who disdained not to "take upon Him the form of a servant"
[Philippians 2:7], would much less disdain to be present at the marriage of
servants; He who sat down "with publicans and sinners" [Matthew 9:13], would
much less refuse to sit down with those present at the marriage. Assuredly they
who invited Him had not formed a proper judgment of Him, nor did they invite
Him as some great one, but merely as an ordinary acquaintance; and this the
Evangelist has hinted at, when he says, "The mother of Jesus was there, and His
brethren." Just as they invited her and His brethren, they invited Jesus.

John 2:3
"And when they wanted wine, His mother says unto Him, They have no wine."
Here it is worth while to enquire whence it came into His mother's mind to
imagine anything great of her Son; for He had as yet done no miracle, since the
Evangelist says, "This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee."
[John 2:11]
2. Now if any say that this is not a sufficient proof that it was the
"beginning of His miracles," because there is added simply "in Cana of Galilee,"
as allowing it to have been the first done there, but not altogether and absolutely
the first, for He probably might have done others elsewhere, we will make
answer to him of that which we have said before. And of what kind? The words
of John (the Baptist); "And I knew Him not; but that He should be made manifest
to Israel, therefore am I come, baptizing with water." Now if He had wrought
miracles in early age, the Israelites would not have needed another to declare
Him. For He who came among men, and by His miracles was so made known,
not to those only in Judæa, but also to those in Syria and beyond, and who did
this in three years only, or rather who did not need even these three years to
manifest Himself [Matthew 4:24], for immediately and from the first His fame
went abroad everywhere; He, I say, who in a short time so shone forth by the
multitude of His miracles, that His name was well known to all, was much less
likely, if while a child He had from an early age wrought miracles, to escape
notice so long. For what was done would have seemed stranger as done by a boy,
and there would have been time for twice or thrice as many, and much more. But
in fact He did nothing while He was a child, save only that one thing to which
Luke has testified [Luke 2:46], that at the age of twelve years He sat hearing the
doctors, and was thought admirable for His questioning. Besides, it was in
accordance with likelihood and reason that He did not begin His signs at once
from an early age; for they would have deemed the thing a delusion. For if when