grieved, when the apartments are opened, and the tissues, and the golden
ornaments, and silver vessels, are sent back to their several owners. Next, the
bridegroom will have no anxiety about the loss, nor for the security of the
accumulated treasures. Thirdly again, in addition to this, which is the crown of
all these benefits, by these very points he will be showing his own judgment, that
indeed he has no pleasure in any of these things, and that he will moreover put
an end to everything else in keeping with them, and will never so much as allow
the existence either of dances, or of immodest songs. I am aware that I shall
appear perhaps ridiculous to many persons, in giving such admonitions. Still
nevertheless, if you will but listen to me, as time goes on, and the benefit of the
practice accrues to you, then you will understand the advantage of it. And the
laughter will pass off, and you will laugh at the present fashion, and will see that
the present practice is really that of silly children and of drunken men. Whereas
what I recommend is the part of soberness, and wisdom, and of the sublimest
way of life. What then do I say is our duty? Take away from marriage all those
shameful, those Satanic, those immodest songs, those companies of profligate
young people, and this will avail to chasten the spirit of your bride. For she will
at once thus reason with herself; "Wonderful! What a philosopher this man is!
He regards the present life as nothing, he has brought me here into his house, to
be a mother, to bring up his children, to manage his household affairs." "Yes, but
these things are distasteful to a bride?" Just for the first or second day—but not
afterwards; nay, she will even reap from them the greatest delight, and relieve
herself of all suspicion. For a man who can endure neither flute-players, nor
dancers, nor broken songs, and that too at the very time of his wedding, that man
will scarcely endure ever to do or say anything shameful. And then after this,
when you have stripped the marriage of all these things, then take her, and form
and mould her carefully, encouraging her bashfulness to a considerable length of
time, and not destroying it suddenly. For even if the damsel be very bold, yet for
a time she will keep silence out of reverence for her husband, and feeling herself
a novice in the circumstances. Thou then break not off this reserve too hastily, as

unchaste husbands do, but encourage it for a long time. For this will be a great
advantage to you. Meanwhile she will not complain, she will not find fault with
any laws you may frame for her. During that time therefore, during which
shame, like a sort of bridle laid upon the soul, suffers her not to make any
murmur, nor to complain of what is done, lay down all your laws. For as soon as
ever she acquires boldness, she will overturn and confound everything without
any sense of fear. When is there then another time so advantageous for moulding
a wife, as that during which she reverences her husband, and is still timid, and
still shy? Then lay down all your laws for her, and willing or unwilling, she will
certainly obey them. But how shall you help spoiling her modesty? By showing
her that you yourself art no less modest than she is, addressing to her but few
words, and those too with great gravity and collectedness. Then entrust her with
the discourses of wisdom, for her soul will receive them. And establish her in
that loveliest habit, I mean modesty. If you wish me, I will also tell you by way
of specimen, what sort of language should be addressed to her. For if Paul shrank
not from saying, "Defraud ye not one the other" [2 Corinthians 7:5], and spoke
the language of a bridesmaid, or rather not of a bridesmaid, but of a spiritual
soul, much more will not we shrink from speaking. What then is the language we
ought to address to her? With great delicacy then we may say to her, "I have
taken you, my child, to be partner of my life, and have brought you in to share
with me in the closest and most honorable ties, in my children, and the
superintendence of my house. And what advice then shall I now recommend
you?" But rather, first talk with her of your love for her; for there is nothing that
so contributes to persuade a hearer to admit sincerely the things that are said, as
to be assured that they are said with hearty affection. How then are you to show
that affection? By saying, "when it was in my power to take many to wife, both
with better fortunes, and of noble family, I did not so choose, but I was
enamoured of you, and your beautiful life, your modesty, your gentleness, and
soberness of mind." Then immediately from these beginnings open the way to
your discourse on true wisdom, and with some circumlocution make a protest