some greater, some less honor. In order then that they may not exalt themselves
one above the other, and say as they did before, "Who is the greatest" [Matthew
18:1], nor be angry one against the other, He takes down the high thoughts of
them all, by saying, that "although you may be very great, you ought to have no
high thoughts towards your brother." And He mentioned not the greater action,
that "if I have washed the feet of the traitor, what great matter if you one
another's?" but having exemplified this by deeds, He then left it to the judgment
of the spectators. Therefore He said, "Whosoever shall do and teach, the same
shall be called great" [Matthew 5:19]; for this is "to teach" a thing, actually to
do it. What pride should not this remove? What kind of folly and insolence
should it not annihilate! He who sits upon the Cherubim washed the feet of the
traitor, and do you, O man, you that are earth and ashes and cinders and dust, do
you exalt yourself, and are you highminded? And how great a hell would you
not deserve? If then you desire a high state of mind, come, I will show you the
way to it; for thou dost not even know what it is. The man then who gives heed
to the present things as being great, is of a mean soul; so that there can neither be
humility without greatness of soul, nor conceit except from littleness of soul. For
as little children are eager for trifles, gaping upon balls and hoops and dice, but
cannot even form an idea of important matters; so in this case, one who is truly
wise, will deem present things as nothing, (so that he will neither choose to
acquire them himself, nor to receive them from others;) but he who is not of such
a character will be affected in a contrary way, intent upon cobwebs and shadows
and dreams of things less substantial than these.

John 13:16-18
"Verily I say unto you, the servant is not greater than his lord, neither he that is
sent greater than he that sent him. If you know these things, happy are you if you
do them. I speak not of you all —but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, He that
eats bread with Me has lifted up his heel against Me."
What He said before, this He says here also, to shame them; "For if the
servant is not greater than his master, nor he that is sent greater than him that
sent him, and these things have been done by Me, much more ought they to be
done by you." Then, lest any one should say, "Why now do You say these things?
Do we not already know them?" He adds this very thing, "I speak not to you as
not knowing, but that by your actions ye may show forth the things spoken of."
For "to know," belongs to all; but "to do," not to all. On this account He said,
"Blessed are you if you do them"; and on this account I continually and ever say
the same to you, although ye know it, that I may set you on the work. Since even
Jews "know," but yet they are not "blessed"; for they do not what they know.
"I speak not," He says, "of you all." O what forbearance! Not yet does He
convict the traitor, but veils the matter, hence giving him room for repentance.
He convicts and yet does not convict him when He says thus, "He that eats
bread with Me has lifted up his heel against Me." It seems to me that the, "The
servant is not greater than his lord," was uttered for this purpose also, that if any
persons should at any time suffer harm either from domestics or from any of the
meaner sort, they should not be offended; looking to the instance of Judas, who
having enjoyed ten thousand good things, repaid his Benefactor with the
contrary. On this account He added, "He that eats bread with Me," and letting
pass all the rest, He has put that which was most fitted to restrain and shame
him; "he who was fed by Me," He says, "and who shared My table." And He
spoke the words, to instruct them to benefit those who did evil to them, even
though such persons should continue incurable.