FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.4.

both is there something suitable and pleasurable according to
nature: and in these all men agree; wherefore the Philosopher (Ethic.
iii, 11) calls them "common" and "necessary." But concupiscences
of the second kind are proper to men, to whom it is proper to devise
something as good and suitable, beyond that which nature requires.
Hence the Philosopher says (Rhet. i, 11) that the former
concupiscences are "irrational," but the latter, "rational." And
because different men reason differently, therefore the latter are also
called (Ethic. iii, 11) "peculiar and acquired," i.e. in addition to those
that are natural.
Reply to Objection 1: The same thing that is the object of the natural
appetite, may be the object of the animal appetite, once it is
apprehended. And in this way there may be an animal
concupiscence of food, drink, and the like, which are objects of the
natural appetite.
Reply to Objection 2: The difference between those concupiscences
that are natural and those that are not, is not merely a material
difference; it is also, in a way, formal, in so far as it arises from a
difference in the active object. Now the object of the appetite is the
apprehended good. Hence diversity of the active object follows from
diversity of apprehension: according as a thing is apprehended as
suitable, either by absolute apprehension, whence arise natural
concupiscences, which the Philosopher calls "irrational" (Rhet. i,
11); or by apprehension together with deliberation, whence arise
those concupiscences that are not natural, and which for this very
reason the Philosopher calls "rational" (Rhet. i, 11).
Reply to Objection 3: Man has not only universal reason, pertaining
to the intellectual faculty; but also particular reason pertaining to the
sensitive faculty, as stated in the FP, Question 78, Article 4; FP,
Question 81, Article 3: so that even rational concupiscence may
pertain to the sensitive appetite. Moreover the sensitive appetite can
be moved by the universal reason also, through the medium of the
particular imagination.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether concupiscence is infinite?

Objection 1: It would seem that concupiscence is not infinite. For the
object of concupiscence is good, which has the aspect of an end.
But where there is infinity there is no end (Metaph. ii, 2). Therefore
concupiscence cannot be infinite.
Objection 2: Further, concupiscence is of the fitting good, since it
proceeds from love. But the infinite is without proportion, and
therefore unfitting. Therefore concupiscence cannot be infinite.
Objection 3: Further, there is no passing through infinite things: and
thus there is no reaching an ultimate term in them. But the subject of
concupiscence is not delighted until he attain the ultimate term.
Therefore, if concupiscence were infinite, no delight would ever
ensue.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Polit. i, 3) that "since
concupiscence is infinite, men desire an infinite number of things."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), concupiscence is twofold;
one is natural, the other is not natural. Natural concupiscence
cannot be actually infinite: because it is of that which nature
requires; and nature ever tends to something finite and fixed. Hence
man never desires infinite meat, or infinite drink. But just as in
nature there is potential successive infinity, so can this kind of
concupiscence be infinite successively; so that, for instance, after
getting food, a man may desire food yet again; and so of anything
else that nature requires: because these bodily goods, when
obtained, do not last for ever, but fail. Hence Our Lord said to the
woman of Samaria (Jn. 4:13): "Whosever drinketh of this water, shall
thirst again."
But non-natural concupiscence is altogether infinite. Because, as
stated above (Article 3), it follows from the reason, and it belongs to
the reason to proceed to infinity. Hence he that desires riches, may
desire to be rich, not up to a certain limit, but to be simply as rich as
possible.
Another reason may be assigned, according to the Philosopher
(Polit. i, 3), why a certain concupiscence is finite, and another