and some upon the head; giving full swing in every way to their own madness.
For indeed they inflicted the blows that are most insulting of all, buffeting,
smiting with the palms of their hands, and to these blows adding the insult of
spitting at Him. And words again teeming with much derision did they speak,
saying, "prophesy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote you?" because the
multitude called Him a prophet.
But another [Luke 22:64] says, that they covered His face with His own
garment, and did these things, as though they had got in the midst of them some
vile and worthless fellow. And not freemen only, but slaves also were
intemperate with this intemperance towards Him at that time.
These things let us read continually, these things let us hear aright, these
things let us write in our minds, for these are our honors. In these things do I
take a pride, not only in the thousands of dead which He raised, but also in the
sufferings which He endured. These things Paul puts forward in every way, the
cross, the death, the sufferings, the revilings, the insults, the scoffs. And now he
says, "let us go forth unto Him bearing His reproach;" [Hebrews 13:13] and
now, "who for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, despising the
shame." [Hebrews 12:2]
"Now Peter sat in the court without; and a damsel came unto him, saying,
thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. But he denied before them all, saying, I
know not what you say. And when he had gone out into the porch, another maid
saw him, and says, this man also was there with Jesus of Nazareth. And again he
denied with an oath. And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and
said unto Peter, surely thou also art one of them, for your speech betrays you.
Then began he to curse and to swear, I know not the man. And immediately the
cock crew. And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which said, before the
cock crow, you shall deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly."
Oh strange and wonderful acts! When indeed he saw his master seized only,
he was so fervent as both to draw his sword, and to cut off the man's ear; but
when it was natural for him to be more indignant, and to be inflamed and to

burn, hearing such revilings, then he becomes a denier. For who would not have
been inflamed to madness by the things that were then done? Yet the disciple,
overcome by fears, so far from showing indignation, even denies, and endures
not the threat of a miserable and mean girl, and not once only, but a second and
third time does he deny Him; and in a short period, and not so much as before
judges, for it was without for "when he had gone out into the porch," they asked
him, and he did not even readily come to a sense of his fall. And this Luke says,
[Luke 22:61] namely, that Christ looked on him showing that he not only denied
Him, but was not even brought to remembrance from within, and this though the
cock had crowed; but he needed a further remembrance from his master, and His
look was to him instead of a voice; so exceedingly was he full of fear.
But Mark says, that when he had once denied, then first the cock crew, but
when thrice, then for the second time; for he declares more particularly the
weakness of the disciple, and that he was utterly dead with fear; having learned
these things of his master [1 Peter 5:13] himself, for he was a follower of Peter.
In which respect one would most marvel at him, that so far from hiding his
teacher's faults, he declared it more distinctly than the rest, on this very account,
that he was his disciple.
2. How then is what is said true, when Matthew affirms that Christ said,
"Verily I say unto you, that before the cock crow you shall deny me thrice;"
[Matthew 26:34] and Mark declares after the third denial, that "The cock crew
the second time?" [Mark 14:72] Nay, most certainly is it both true and in
harmony. For because at each crowing the cock is wont to crow both a third and
a fourth time, Mark, to show that not even the sound checked him, and brought
him to recollection says this. So that both things are true. For before the cock
had finished the one crowing, he had denied a third time. And not even when
reminded of his sin by Christ did he dare to weep openly, lest he should be
betrayed by his tears, but "he went out, and wept bitterly."
"And when it was day, they led away Jesus from Caiaphas to Pilate." For
because they were desirous to put Him to death, but were not able themselves