easy, those of vice are full of labor. For what is more vexatious than to be
lending, and taking thought about usuries and bargains, and demanding sureties,
and fearing and trembling about securities, about the principal, about the
writings, about the interest, about the bondsmen?
For such is the nature of worldly things; yea, nothing is so unsound and
suspicious as that which is accounted security, and contrived for that purpose;
but to show mercy is easy, and delivers from all anxiety.
Let us not then traffic in other men's calamities, nor make a trade of our
benevolence. And I know indeed that many hear these words with displeasure;
but what is the profit of silence? For though I should hold my peace, and give no
trouble by my words, I could not by this silence deliver you from your
punishment; rather it has altogether the opposite result; the penalty is enhanced,
and not to you only, but to me also, does such a silence procure punishment.
What then signify our gracious words, when in our works they help us not, but
rather do harm? What is the good of delighting men in word, while we vex them
in deed, bringing pleasure to the ears, and punishment to the soul? Wherefore I
must needs make you sorry here, that we may not suffer punishment there.
9. For indeed a dreadful disease, beloved, dreadful and needing much
attendance, has fallen on the church. Those, namely, who are enjoined not even
by honest labors to lay up treasures, but to open their houses to the needy, make
a profit of other men's poverty, devising a specious robbery, a plausible
covetousness.
For tell me not of the laws that are without; since even the publican fulfills
the law that is without, but nevertheless is punished: which will be the case with
us also, unless we refrain from oppressing the poor, and from using their need
and necessity as an occasion for shameless trafficking.
For to this intent you have wealth, to relieve poverty, not to make a gain of
poverty; but thou with show of relief makest the calamity greater, and sellest
benevolence for money. Sell it, I forbid you not, but for a heavenly kingdom.
Receive not a small price for so good a deed, your monthly one in the hundred,

but that immortal life. Why are you beggarly, and poor, and mean, selling your
great things for a little, even for goods that perish, when it should be for an
everlasting kingdom? Why do you leave God, and get human gains? Why do
you pass by the wealthy one, and trouble him that has not? And leaving the sure
paymaster make your bargain with the unthankful? The other longs to repay, but
this even grudges in the act of repaying. This hardly repays a hundredth part, but
the other "an hundredfold and eternal life." This with insults and revilings, but
the other with praises and auspicious words. This stirs up envy against you, but
the other even weaves for you crowns. This hardly here, but the other both there
and here.
Surely then is it not the utmost senselessness, not so much as to know how
to gain? How many have lost their very principal for the interest's sake? How
many have fallen into perils for usurious gains. How many have involved both
themselves and others in extreme poverty through their unspeakable
covetousness!
For tell me not this, that he is pleased to receive, and is thankful for the
loan. Why, this is a result of your cruelty. Since Abraham too, contriving how his
plan might take with the barbarians, did himself give up his wife to them; not
however willingly, but through fear of Pharaoh. So also the poor man, because
you count him not even worth so much money, is actually compelled to be
thankful for cruelty.
And it seems to me as though, should you deliver him from dangers, you
would exact of him a payment for this deliverance. "Away," says he; "let it not
be." What do you say? Delivering him from the greater evil, you are unwilling to
exact money, and for the lesser do you display so much inhumanity?
Do you see not how great a punishment is appointed for the deed? Do you
not hear that even in the old law this is forbidden? But what is the plea of the
many? "When I have received the interest, I give to the poor;" one tells me.
Speak reverently, O man; God desires not such sacrifices. Deal not subtly with
the law. Better not give to a poor man, than give from that source; for the money