of love makes him who pays richer than before. Knowing these things then, O
Sirs, most honoured and devout, cease not continually displaying this excellent
disposition towards me. For although you need no exhortation for this purpose
from me yet as I greatly long for your love I remind you, even when you need it
not, both in order that you may constantly write to me, and also inform me of the
state of your health. For even if you do not need any one to remind you on this
account, I shall not desist from continually seeking this at your hands; as it is a
matter which I have very much at heart. That it is a difficult task owing both to
the season of the year, and the difficulty of the journey, and the scarcity of
travellers who will do this service for you I am well aware: nevertheless as far as
is possible and practicable in the midst of so much difficulty, we exhort you to
write constantly, and crave this favour from your love.

## Correspondence with Pope Innocent I

From John to Innocent
To my lord, the most reverend and divinely beloved
bishop Innocent, John sends greeting in the Lord
1. [I suppose] that even before receiving our letter your Piety has heard of
the iniquity which has been perpetrated here. For the magnitude of our distress
has left scarcely a single portion of the world uninformed of this grievous
tragedy: for report carrying the tidings of what has happened to the very
extremities of the earth, has everywhere caused great mourning and lamentation.
But inasmuch as we ought not to mourn, but to restore order, and to see by what
means this most grievous storm of the Church may be stayed, we have deemed it
necessary to persuade my lords, the most honoured and pious bishops
Demetrius, Pansophius, Pappus and Eugenius to leave their own churches, and
venture on this great sea voyage, and set out on a long journey from home, and
hasten to your Charity, and, after informing you clearly of everything, to take
measures for redressing the evils as speedily as possible. And with them we have
sent the most honoured and beloved of our Deacons, Paulus and Cyriacus, but
we also ourselves, in the form of a letter, will briefly instruct your Charity
concerning the things which have come to pass. For Theophilus, who has been
entrusted with the presidency of the Church in Alexandria, having been
commanded to repair alone to Constantinople, certain men having brought an
accusation against him to the most devout Emperor, arrived bringing with him
no small multitude of Egyptian Bishops, as if wishing to show from the outset,
that he came for war and antagonism; moreover when he set foot in the great and
divinely beloved Constantinople he did not enter the Church according to the

custom and the law which has prevailed from ancient time, he held no
intercourse with us, and admitted us to no share in his conversation, his prayers,
or his society: but as soon as he disembarked, having hurried past the vestibule
of the Church, he departed and lodged somewhere outside the city, and although
we earnestly entreated him, and those who had come with him, to be our guests
(for everything had been made ready, and lodgings provided, and whatever was
suitable) neither they, nor he consented. We seeing this, were in great perplexity,
not being able to discover the cause of this unjust hostility; nevertheless we
discharged our part, doing what became us, and continually beseeching him to
meet us and to say for what cause he hazarded so great a contest at the outset,
and threw the city into such confusion. But as he did not choose to state the
reason, and those who accused him were urgent, our most devout Emperor
summoned us and commanded us to go outside the walls to the place where
Theophilus was sojourning, and hear the argument against him. For they accused
him of assault, and slaughter and countless other crimes; but knowing as we did
the laws of the fathers, and paying respect and deference to the man, and having
also his own letters which prove that lawsuits ought not to be taken beyond the
border, but that affairs of the several provinces should be treated within the
limits of the province, we would not accept the office of judge, but deprecated it
with great earnestness. But he, as if striving to aggravate the former insults,
having summoned my archdeacon, by a stretch of arbitrary power, as if the
Church were already widowed, and had no bishop, by means of this man
seduced all the clergy to his own side; and the Churches became destitute, as the
clergy in each were gradually withdrawn, and instructed to hand in petitions
against us, and trained to prepare accusations. And having done this he sent and
summoned us to trial, although he had not yet cleared himself of the charges
brought against him, a proceeding directly contrary to the canons and to all the
laws.
2. But we being aware that we were not cited to a trial (for otherwise we
would have presented ourselves any number of times) but to the presence of an