FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.6.

Reply to Objection 3: He that loses his money does not therefore
lose the possibility of having money, and therefore it is reasonable
for the habit of liberality to remain. But in the state of glory not only
is the object of faith, which is the unseen, removed actually, but even
its possibility, by reason of the unchangeableness of heavenly bliss:
and so such a habit would remain to no purpose.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether charity remains after this life, in glory?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity does not remain after this life,
in glory. Because according to 1 Cor. 13:10, "when that which is
perfect is come, that which is in part," i.e. that which is imperfect,
"shall be done away." Now the charity of the wayfarer is imperfect.
Therefore it will be done away when the perfection of glory is
attained.
Objection 2: Further, habits and acts are differentiated by their
objects. But the object of love is good apprehended. Since therefore
the apprehension of the present life differs from the apprehension of
the life to come, it seems that charity is not the same in both cases.
Objection 3: Further, things of the same kind can advance from
imperfection to perfection by continuous increase. But the charity of
the wayfarer can never attain to equality with the charity of heaven,
however much it be increased. Therefore it seems that the charity of
the wayfarer does not remain in heaven.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:8): "Charity never
falleth away."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), when the imperfection of a
thing does not belong to its specific nature, there is nothing to
hinder the identical thing passing from imperfection to perfection,
even as man is perfected by growth, and whiteness by intensity. Now
charity is love, the nature of which does not include imperfection,
since it may relate to an object either possessed or not possessed,
either seen or not seen. Therefore charity is not done away by the
perfection of glory, but remains identically the same.
Reply to Objection 1: The imperfection of charity is accidental to it;
because imperfection is not included in the nature of love. Now
although that which is accidental to a thing be withdrawn, the
substance remains. Hence the imperfection of charity being done
away, charity itself is not done away.
Reply to Objection 2: The object of charity is not knowledge itself; if
it were, the charity of the wayfarer would not be the same as the
charity of heaven: its object is the thing known, which remains the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.7.

same, viz. God Himself.
Reply to Objection 3: The reason why charity of the wayfarer cannot
attain to the perfection of the charity of heaven, is a difference on the
part of the cause: for vision is a cause of love, as stated in Ethic. ix,
5: and the more perfectly we know God, the more perfectly we love
Him.