Observe that here also he means by "the Circumcision," not the rite, but the
Jews; whenever he speaks of the rite, and wishes to contrast it, he adds the word
"uncircumcision;" as when he says, "For circumcision indeed profits, if you be a
doer of the law; but if you be a transgressor of the law, your circumcision has
become uncircumcision." [Romans 2:25] And again, "Neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision." But when it is to the Jews and not to the
deed that he gives this name, and wishes to signify the nation, he opposes to it
not uncircumcision in its literal sense, but the Gentiles. For the Jews are the
contradistinction to the Gentiles, the Circumcision to the Uncircumcision. Thus
when he says above, "For He that wrought for Peter into the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, wrought for me also unto the Gentiles;" and again, "We unto the
Gentiles and they unto the Circumcision," he means not the rite itself, but the
Jewish nation, thus distinguishing them from the Gentiles.
Ver. 10. "Only they would that we should remember the poor; which very
thing I was also zealous to do."
This is his meaning: In our preaching we divided the world between us, I
took the Gentiles and they the Jews, according to the Divine decree; but to the
sustenance of the poor among the Jews I also contributed my share, which, had
there been any dissension between us, they would not have accepted. Next, who
were these poor persons? Many of the believing Jews in Palestine had been
deprived of all their goods, and scattered over the world, as he mentions in the
Epistle to the Hebrews , "For you took joyfully the spoiling of your possessions;"
and in writing to the Thessalonians, [1 Thessalonians 2:14] he extols their
fortitude, "You became imitators of the Churches of God which are in
Judæa,...for you also suffered the same thing of your own countrymen, even as
they did of the Jews." And he shows throughout that those Greeks who believed
were not under persecution from the rest, such as the believing Jews were
suffering from their own kindred, for there is no nation of a temper so cruel.
Wherefore he exercises much zeal, as appears in the Epistles to the Romans
[Romans 15:25-27] and Corinthians [1 Corinthians 16:1-3] that these persons

should meet with much attention; and Paul not only collects money for them, but
himself conveys it, as he says, "But now I go unto Jerusalem ministering unto
the saints," [Romans 15:25] for they were without the necessaries of life. And he
here shows that in this instance having resolved to assist them, he had
undertaken and would not abandon it.
Having by these means declared the unanimity and harmony between the
Apostles and himself, he is obliged to proceed to mention his debate with Peter
at Antioch.
Ver. 11, 12. "But when Cephas came to Antioch, I resisted him to the face,
because he stood condemned. For before that certain came from James, he did
eat with the Gentiles: but when they came, he drew back and separated himself,
fearing them that were of the circumcision."
Many, on a superficial reading of this part of the Epistle, suppose that Paul
accused Peter of hypocrisy. But this is not so, indeed it is not, far from it; we
shall discover great wisdom, both of Paul and Peter, concealed herein for the
benefit of their hearers. But first a word must be said about Peter's freedom in
speech, and how it was ever his way to outstrip the other disciples. Indeed it was
upon one such occasion that he gained his name from the unbending and
impregnable character of his faith. For when all were interrogated in common,
he stepped before the others and answered, "You are the Christ, the Son of the
living God." [Matthew 16:16] This was when the keys of heaven were
committed to him. So too, he appears to have been the only speaker on the
Mount; [Matthew 17:4] and when Christ spoke of His crucifixion, and the others
kept silence, he said, "Be it far from You." [Matthew 16:22] These words evince,
if not a cautious temper, at least a fervent love; and in all instances we find him
more vehement than the others, and rushing forward into danger. So when Christ
was seen on the beach, and the others were pushing the boat in, he was too
impatient to wait for its coming to land. [John 21:7] And after the Resurrection,
when the Jews were murderous and maddened, and sought to tear the Apostles in
pieces, he first dared to come forward, and to declare, that the Crucified was