they declared all things that God had done with them." [Acts 15:4] See what a
providence is here! "But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which
believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them
to keep the law of Moses. And the apostles and elders came together to consider
of this matter. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up and said
unto them, Men and brethren, you know how that of old days God made choice
among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel,
and believe." [Acts 15:5-7] Observe Peter from the first standing aloof
([κεχωρισμένον]) from the affair, and even to this time judaizing. And yet (says
he) "ye know." [ch. 10:45; 11:2] Perhaps those were present who of old found
fault with him in the matter of Cornelius, and went in with him (on that
occasion): for this reason he brings them forward as witnesses. "From old days,"
he says, "did choose among you." What means, "Among you?" Either, in
Palestine, or, you being present. "By my mouth." Observe how he shows that it
was God speaking by him, and no human utterance. "And God, that knows the
hearts, gave testimony unto them:" he refers them to the spiritual testimony: "by
giving them the Holy Ghost even as unto us." [Acts 15:8] Everywhere he puts the
Gentiles upon a thorough equality. "And put no difference between us and them,
having purified their hearts by faith." [Acts 15:9] From faith alone, he says, they
obtained the same gifts. This is also meant as a lesson to those (objectors); this is
able to teach even them that faith only is needed, not works nor circumcision.
For indeed they do not say all this only by way of apology for the Gentiles, but
to teach (the Jewish believers) also to abandon the Law. However, at present this
is not said. "Now therefore why do you tempt God, to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples?" [Acts 15:10] What means, "Tempt ye God?" As if He had not
power to save by faith. Consequently, it proceeds from a want of faith, this
bringing in the Law. Then he shows that they themselves were nothing benefited
by it, and he turns the whole (stress of his speech) against the Law, not against
them, and (so) cuts short the accusation of them: "which neither our fathers nor
we were able to bear. But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus we

shall be saved, even as they." [Acts 15:11] How full of power these words! The
same that Paul says at large in the Epistle to the Romans, the same says Peter
here. "For if Abraham," says (Paul), "was justified by works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God." [Romans 4:2] Do you perceive that all this is more a
lesson for them than apology for the Gentiles? However, if he had spoken this
without a plea for speaking, he would have been suspected: an occasion having
offered, he lays hold of it, and speaks out fearlessly. See on all occasions how
the designs of their foes are made to work with them. If those had not stirred the
question, these things would not have been spoken, nor what follows.
(Recapitulation.) (b) But let us look more closely at what has been said.
"And certain men," etc. In Jerusalem, then, there were not any believers from
among the Gentiles: but in Antioch of course there were. Therefore there came
down certain yet laboring under this disease of the love of rule, and wishing to
have those of the Gentiles attached to them. And yet Paul, though he too was
learned in the Law, was not thus affected. "When therefore Paul and Barnabas
had no small disputation with them," etc. [Acts 15:2] But when he returned from
thence, the doctrine also became more exact. For if they at Jerusalem enjoin no
such thing, much more these (have no right to do so). "And being brought on
their way," etc, "they caused no small joy to the brethren." [Acts 15:3] Do you
mark, as many as are not enamoured of rule, rejoiced in their believing? It was
no ambitious feeling that prompted their recitals, neither was it for display, but in
justification of the preaching to the Gentiles. [Acts 15:4] Thus they say nothing
of what had happened in the matter of the Jews. "But there arose up certain of
the sect of the Pharisees which believed," etc. [Acts 15:5] (a) But even if they
would needs bring over the Gentiles to their side, they learn that neither must the
Apostles overlook it. "And the Apostles and elders," etc. [Acts 15:6] "Among
us," he says, "God chose:" and "from old days:" long ago, he says, not now. And
this too is no small point— at a time when Jews believed, not turned away (from
the Gospel). "Among us;" an argument from the place: "of old days," from the
time. And that expression, "Chose:" just as in their own case he says not, (so)