and parenthetic. And that which is an object of desire, is on either side of it, and
put at length too, so as to throw the other into shade. Now this he says, not as
affirming that the Spirit is Christ, far from it, but to show that he who has the
Spirit not only is called Christ's, but even has Christ Himself. For it cannot but
be that where the Spirit is, there Christ is also. For wheresoever one Person of
the Trinity is, there the whole Trinity is present. For It is undivided in Itself, and
has a most entire Oneness. What then, it may be said, will happen, if Christ be in
us? "The body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of
righteousness." You see the great evils that come of not having the Holy Spirit;
death, enmity against God, inability to satisfy His laws, not being Christ's as we
should be, the want of His indwelling. Consider now also what great blessings
come of having the Spirit. Being Christ's, having Christ himself, vying with the
Angels (for this is what mortifying the flesh is), and living an immortal life,
holding henceforward the earnests of the Resurrection, running with ease the
race of virtue. For he does not say so little as that the body is henceforward
inactive for sin, but that it is even dead, so magnifying the ease of the race. For
such an one without troubles and labors gains the crown. Then afterward for this
reason he adds also, "to sin," that you may see that it is the viciousness, not the
essence of the body, that He has abolished at once. For if the latter had been
done, many things even of a kind to be beneficial to the soul would have been
abolished also. This however is not what he says, but while it is yet alive and
abiding, he contends, it is dead. For this is the sign of our having the Son, of the
Spirit being in us, that our bodies should be in no respect different from those
that lie on the bier with respect to the working of sin (so the manuscripts Sav. "of
the body." The preceding words are slightly corrupt.) But be not affrighted at
hearing of mortifying. For in it you have what is really life, with no death to
succeed it: and such is that of the Spirit. It yields not to death any more, but
wears out death and consumes it, and that which it receives, it keeps it immortal.
And this is why after saying "the body is dead," he does not say, "but the Spirit
'lives,'" but, "is life," to point out that He (the Spirit) had the power of giving this

to others also. Then again to brace up his hearer, he tells him the cause of the
Life, and the proof of it. Now this is righteousness; for where there is no sin,
death is not to be seen either; but where death is not to be seen, life is
indissoluble.
Ver. 11. "But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you, He that raised up our Lord shall also quicken your mortal bodies by His
Spirit that dwells in you."
Again, he touches the point of the Resurrection, since this was the most
encouraging hope to the hearer, and gave him a security from what had happened
unto Christ. Now be not thou afraid because you are compassed about with a
dead body. Let it have the Spirit, and it shall assuredly rise again. What then,
shall the bodies which have not the Spirit not rise? How then must "all stand
before the judgment-seat of Christ?" [Romans 14:10] or how will the account of
hell be trustworthy? For if they that have not the Spirit rise not, there will not be
a hell at all. What then is it which is said? All shall rise, yet not all to life, but
some to punishment and some to life. [John 5:29] This is why he did not say,
shall raise up, but shall quicken. [Daniel 12:2] And this is a greater thing than
resurrection, and is given to the just only. And the cause of this honor he adds in
the words, "By His Spirit that dwells in you." And so if while here thou drive
away the grace of the Spirit, and do not depart with it still safe, you will
assuredly perish, though thou dost rise again. For as He will not endure then, if
He see His Spirit shining in you, to give you up to punishment, so neither will
He allow them, if He see It quenched, to bring you into the Bride-chamber, even
as He admitted not those virgins. [Matthew 25:12]
Suffer not your body then to live in this world, that it may live then! Make
it die, that it die not. For if it keep living, it will not live: but if it die, then shall it
live. And this is the case with resurrection in general. For it must die first and be
buried, and then become immortal. But this has been done in the Font. It has
therefore had first its crucifixion and burial, and then been raised. This has also
happened with the Lord's Body. For that also was crucified and buried (7