SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.7, C.7.

he judges wrongly about the common end of life, wherefore folly is
properly opposed to wisdom, which makes us judge aright about the
universal cause. Ignorance implies a defect in the mind, even about
any particular things whatever, so that it is contrary to knowledge,
which gives man a right judgment about particular causes, viz. about
creatures. Rashness is clearly opposed to counsel, whereby man
does not proceed to action before deliberating with his reason.
Reply to Objection 2: The gift of understanding is about the first
principles of that knowledge which is conferred by grace; but
otherwise than faith, because it belongs to faith to assent to them,
while it belongs to the gift of understanding to pierce with the mind
the things that are said.
Reply to Objection 3: The gift of understanding is related to both
kinds of knowledge, viz. speculative and practical, not as to the
judgment, but as to apprehension, by grasping what is said.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.7, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the sixth beatitude, "Blessed are the

clean of heart," etc., responds to the gift of understanding?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sixth beatitude, "Blessed are the
clean of heart, for they shall see God," does not respond to the gift
of understanding. Because cleanness of heart seems to belong
chiefly to the appetite. But the gift of understanding belongs, not to
the appetite, but rather to the intellectual power. Therefore the
aforesaid beatitude does not respond to the gift of understanding.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Acts 15:9): "Purifying their hearts
by faith." Now cleanness of heart is acquired by the heart being
purified. Therefore the aforesaid beatitude is related to the virtue of
faith rather than to the gift of understanding.
Objection 3: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost perfect man in the
present state of life. But the sight of God does not belong to the
present life, since it is that which gives happiness to the Blessed, as
stated above (FS, Question 3, Article 8). Therefore the sixth beatitude
which comprises the sight of God, does not respond to the gift of
understanding.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4): "The
sixth work of the Holy Ghost which is understanding, is applicable to
the clean of heart, whose eye being purified, they can see what eye
hath not seen."
I answer that, Two things are contained in the sixth beatitude, as
also in the others, one by way of merit, viz. cleanness of heart; the
other by way of reward, viz. the sight of God, as stated above (FS,
Question 69, Articles 2,4), and each of these, in some way, responds
to the gift of understanding.
For cleanness is twofold. One is a preamble and a disposition to
seeing God, and consists in the heart being cleansed of inordinate
affections: and this cleanness of heart is effected by the virtues and
gifts belonging to the appetitive power. The other cleanness of heart
is a kind of complement to the sight of God; such is the cleanness of
the mind that is purged of phantasms and errors, so as to receive the
truths which are proposed to it about God, no longer by way of
corporeal phantasms, nor infected with heretical misrepresentations: