SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.2.

manner, to that which is contrary to its nature: in one way, as
regards the term of transport---as when it is carried away to
punishment, according to Ps. 49:22, "Lest He snatch you away, and
there be none to deliver you"; in another way, as regards the manner
connatural to man, which is that he should understand the truth
through sensible things. Hence when he is withdrawn from the
apprehension of sensibles, he is said to be carried away, even
though he be uplifted to things whereunto he is directed naturally:
provided this be not done intentionally, as when a man betakes
himself to sleep which is in accordance with nature, wherefore sleep
cannot be called rapture, properly speaking.
This withdrawal, whatever its term may be, may arise from a
threefold cause. First, from a bodily cause, as happens to those who
suffer abstraction from the senses through weakness: secondly, by
the power of the demons, as in those who are possessed: thirdly, by
the power of God. In this last sense we are now speaking of rapture,
whereby a man is uplifted by the spirit of God to things supernatural,
and withdrawn from his senses, according to Ezech. 8:3, "The spirit
lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in
the vision of God into Jerusalem."
It must be observed, however, that sometimes a person is said to be
carried away, not only through being withdrawn from his senses, but
also through being withdrawn from the things to which he was
attending, as when a person's mind wanders contrary to his
purpose. But this is to use the expression in a less proper
signification.
Reply to Objection 1: It is natural to man to tend to divine things
through the apprehension of things sensible, according to Rm. 1:20,
"The invisible things of God . . . are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made." But the mode, whereby a man is
uplifted to divine things and withdrawn from his senses, is not
natural to man.
Reply to Objection 2: It belongs to man's mode and dignity that he be
uplifted to divine things, from the very fact that he is made to God's
image. And since a divine good infinitely surpasses the faculty of
man in order to attain that good, he needs the divine assistance
which is bestowed on him in every gift of grace. Hence it is not
contrary to nature, but above the faculty of nature that man's mind
be thus uplifted in rapture by God.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.2.

Reply to Objection 3: The saying of Damascene refers to those
things which a man does by himself. But as to those things which
are beyond the scope of the free-will, man needs to be uplifted by a
stronger operation, which in a certain respect may be called force if
we consider the mode of operation, but not if we consider its term to
which man is directed both by nature and by his intention.