229. This principle, drawn from the Gospel, reminds us that Christ has made all things one in
himself: heaven and earth, God and man, time and eternity, flesh and spirit, person and society.
The sign of this unity and reconciliation of all things in him is peace. Christ “is our peace” (Eph
2:14). The Gospel message always begins with a greeting of peace, and peace at all times crowns
and confirms the relations between the disciples. Peace is possible because the Lord has
overcome the world and its constant conflict “by making peace through the blood of his cross” (Col
1:20). But if we look more closely at these biblical texts, we find that the locus of this reconciliation
of differences is within ourselves, in our own lives, ever threatened as they are by fragmentation
and breakdown. If hearts are shattered in thousands of pieces, it is not easy to create
authentic peace in society.

230. The message of peace is not about a negotiated settlement but rather the conviction that the
unity brought by the Spirit can harmonize every diversity. It overcomes every conflict by creating a
new and promising synthesis. Diversity is a beautiful thing when it can constantly enter into a
process of reconciliation and seal a sort of cultural covenant resulting in a “reconciled diversity”.
As the bishops of the Congo have put it: “Our ethnic diversity is our wealth… It is only in unity,
through conversion of hearts and reconciliation, that we will be able to help our country to develop
on all levels”.

Realities are more important than ideas

231. There also exists a constant tension between ideas and realities. Realities simply are,
whereas ideas are worked out. There has to be continuous dialogue between the two, lest ideas
become detached from realities. It is dangerous to dwell in the realm of words alone, of images
and rhetoric. So a third principle comes into play: realities are greater than ideas. This calls for
rejecting the various means of masking reality: angelic forms of purity, dictatorships of relativism,

empty rhetoric, objectives more ideal than real, brands of ahistorical fundamentalism, ethical
systems bereft of kindness, intellectual discourse bereft of wisdom.

232. Ideas – conceptual elaborations – are at the service of communication, understanding, and
praxis. Ideas disconnected from realities give rise to ineffectual forms of idealism and nominalism,
capable at most of classifying and defining, but certainly not calling to action. What calls us to
action are realities illuminated by reason. Formal nominalism has to give way to harmonious
objectivity. Otherwise, the truth is manipulated, cosmetics take the place of real care for our
bodies. We have politicians – and even religious leaders – who wonder why people do not
understand and follow them, since their proposals are so clear and logical. Perhaps it is because
they are stuck in the realm of pure ideas and end up reducing politics or faith to rhetoric. Others
have left simplicity behind and have imported a rationality foreign to most people.