Harvey remarks, "Even in their Christology the Valentinians must have their part and counterpart."
strong expression to denote "for ever."
hence concludes that some of the ancient liturgies still extant must even then have been in use. Harvey and others, however,
deny that there is any necessity for supposing the Holy Eucharist to be referred to; the ancient Latin version translates in the
plural, "in gratiarum actionibus."

same reason, they tell us the Saviour said, "One Iota, or one tittle, shall by no means pass away
until all be fulfilled."
3. They further maintain that the passion which took place in the case of the twelfth Æon is
pointed at by the apostasy of Judas, who was the twelfth apostle, and also by the fact that Christ
suffered in the twelfth month. For their opinion is, that He continued to preach for one year only
after His baptism. The same thing is also most clearly indicated by the case of the woman who
suffered from an issue of blood. For after she had been thus afflicted during twelve years, she was
healed by the advent of the Saviour, when she had touched the border of His garment; and on this
account the Saviour said, "Who touched me?"—teaching his disciples the mystery which had
occurred among the Æons, and the healing of that Æon who had been involved in suffering. For
she who had been afflicted twelve years represented that power whose essence, as they narrate,
was stretching itself forth, and flowing into immensity; and unless she had touched the garment of
the Son, that is, Aletheia of the first Tetrad, who is denoted by the hem spoken of, she would
have been dissolved into the general essence [of which she participated]. She stopped short,
however, and ceased any longer to suffer. For the power that went forth from the Son (and this
power they term Horos) healed her, and separated the passion from her.
4. They moreover affirm that the Saviour is shown to be derived from all the Æons, and to
be in Himself everything by the following passage: "Every male that openeth the womb." For
He, being everything, opened the womb of the enthymesis of the suffering Æon, when it had
been expelled from the Pleroma. This they also style the second Ogdoad, of which we shall speak
presently. And they state that it was clearly on this account that Paul said, "And He Himself is all
things;" and again, "All things are to Him, and of Him are all things;" and further, "In Him
hem of the Saviour's garment.
of the Æons.
by the untranslated name Soter.]

Not as being born of it, but as fecundating it, and so producing a manifold offspring. See below.

dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead;" and yet again, "All things are gathered together by
God in Christ." Thus do they interpret these and any like passages to be found in Scripture.
5. They show, further, that that Horos of theirs, whom they call by a variety of names, has two
faculties,—the one of supporting, and the other of separating; and in so far as he supports and
sustains, he is Stauros, while in so far as he divides and separates, he is Horos. They then represent
the Saviour as having indicated this twofold faculty: first, the sustaining power, when He said,
"Whosoever doth not bear his cross (Stauros), and follow after me, cannot be my disciple;" and
again, "Taking up the cross, follow me;" but the separating power when He said, "I came not to
send peace, but a sword." They also maintain that John indicated the same thing when he said,
"The fan is in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge the floor, and will gather the wheat into His
garner; but the chaff He will burn with fire unquenchable." By this declaration He set forth the
faculty of Horos. For that fan they explain to be the cross (Stauros), which consumes, no doubt, all
material objects, as fire does chaff, but it purifies all them that are saved, as a fan does wheat.
Moreover, they affirm that the Apostle Paul himself made mention of this cross in the following
words: "The doctrine of the cross is to them that perish foolishness, but to us who are saved it is
the power of God." And again: "God forbid that I should glory in anything save in the cross
of Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world."
6. Such, then, is the account which they all give of their Pleroma, and of the formation of
the universe, striving, as they do, to adapt the good words of revelation to their own wicked
inventions. And it is not only from the writings of the evangelists and the apostles that they endeavour
to derive proofs for their opinions by means of perverse interpretations and deceitful expositions:
they deal in the same way with the law and the prophets, which contain many parables and allegories
that can frequently be drawn into various senses, according to the kind of exegesis to which they
by the heretics; or, as Harvey conjectures, from his having been more familiar with a Syriac version of the New Testament than
with the Greek original.