God, but despise its biddings. The evil lusts "profess that they know God, but in
works they deny Him." [Titus 1:16] For this is not to witness, but the contrary.
And indeed that others should deny (Him) is nothing wonderful: but that we who
have been called to bear witness should deny Him, is a grievous and a heinous
thing: this of all things does the greatest hurt to our cause. "It shall be to
(your)selves for a testimony." [Luke 21:13], He says: but (this is) when we
ourselves stand to it firmly. If we would all bear witness to Christ, we should
quickly persuade the greater number of the heathen. It is a great thing, my
beloved, the life (one leads). Let a man be savage as a beast, let him openly
condemn you on account of your doctrine, yet he secretly approves, yet he will
praise, yet he will admire. For say, whence can an excellent life proceed? From
no source, except from a Divine Power working in us. "What if there be heathen
also of such a character?" If anywhere any of them be such, it is partly from
nature, partly from vainglory. Will you learn what a brilliancy there is in a good
life, what a force of persuasion it has? Many of the heretics have thus prevailed,
and while their doctrines are corrupt, yet the greater part of men out of reverence
for their (virtuous) life did not go on to examine their doctrine: and many even
condemning them on account of their doctrine, reverence them on account of
their life: not rightly indeed, but still so it is, that they do thus feel (towards
them). This has brought slanders on the awful articles of our creed, this has
turned everything upside down, that no one takes any account of good living:
this is a mischief to the faith. We say that Christ is God; numberless other
arguments we bring forward, and this one among the rest, that He has persuaded
all men to live rightly: but this is the case with few. The badness of the life is a
mischief to the doctrine of the Resurrection, to that of the immortality of the
soul, to that of the Judgment: many other (false doctrines) too it draws on with
itself, fate, necessity, denial of a Providence. For the soul being immersed in
numberless vices, by way of consolations to itself tries to devise these, that it
may not be pained in having to reflect that there is a Judgment, and that virtue
and vice lie in our own power. (Such a) life works numberless evils, it makes

men beasts, and more irrational than beasts: for what things are in each several
nature of the beasts, these it has often collected together in one man, and turned
everything upside down. This is why the devil has brought in the doctrine of
Fate: this is why he has said that the world is without a Providence (Hom. ii. p.
15): this is why he advances his hypothesis of good natures, and evil natures, and
his hypothesis of evil (uncreated and) without beginning, and material (in its
essence): and, in short, all the rest of it, that he may ruin our life. For it is not
possible for a man who is of such a life either to recover himself from corrupt
doctrines, or to remain in a sound faith: but of inevitable necessity he must
receive all this. For I do not think, for my part, that of those who do not live
aright, there could be easily found any who do not hold numberless satanical
devices— as, that there is a nativity (or birth-fate) ([γένεσις]), that things happen
at random, that all is hap-hazard and chance-medley. Wherefore I beseech you
let us have a care for good living, that we may not receive evil doctrines. Cain
received for punishment that he should be (ever) groaning and trembling.
[Genesis 4:14] Such are the wicked, and being conscious within themselves of
numberless bad things, often they start out of their sleep, their thoughts are full
of tumult, their eyes full of perturbation; everything is fraught for them with
misgivings, everything alarms them, their soul is replete with grievous
expectation and cowardly apprehension, contracted with impotent fear and
trembling. Nothing can be more effeminate than such a soul, nothing more inane.
Like madmen, it has no self-possession. For it were well for it that in the
enjoyment of calm and quiet it were enabled to take knowledge of its proper
nobility. But when all things terrify and throw it into perturbation, dreams, and
words, and gestures, and forebodings, indiscriminately, when will it be able to
look into itself, being thus troubled and amazed? Let us therefore do away with
its fear, let us break asunder its bonds. For were there no other punishment, what
punishment could exceed this— to be living always in fear, never to have
confidence, never to be at ease? Therefore knowing these things assuredly, let us
keep ourselves in a state of calm and be careful to practise virtue, that