master:" I bid you speak these same words to yourself; or rather, permit him
freely to speak them to you, and he will say with more justice, "It stops my
breath that you, being healthy, are idle, and practice none of the things which
God has commanded, but having run away from the commandments of your
Lord, goes about dwelling in wickedness, as in a strange land, in drunkenness, in
gluttony, in theft, in extortion, in subverting other men's houses." And you
indeed impute idleness, but I evil works; in your plotting, in your swearing, in
your lying, in your spoiling, in your doing innumerable such things.
And this I say, not as making a law in favor of idleness, far from it; but
rather very earnestly wishing all to be employed; for sloth is the teacher of all
wickedness: but I beseech you not to be unmerciful, nor cruel. Since Paul also,
having made infinite complaints, and said, "If any will not work, neither let him
eat," stopped not at this, but added, "But you, be not weary in well doing." "Nay,
but these things are contradictory. For if you have commanded them not to eat,
how do you exhort us to give?" I do so, says He, for I have also commanded to
avoid them, and "to have no company with them;" and again I said, "Count them
not as enemies, but admonish them;" [2 Thessalonians 3:14-15] not making
contradictory laws, but such as are quite in unison with each other. Because, if
you are prompt to mercy, both he, the poor man, will soon be rid of his idleness,
and you of your cruelty.
"But he has many lies and inventions," you reply. Well, hence again is he
pitiable, for that he has fallen into such distress, as to be hardened even in such
doings. But we, so far from pitying, add even those cruel words, "Have you not
received once and again?" so we talk. What then? Because he was once fed, has
he no need to be fed again? Why do you not make these laws for your own belly
also, and say to it likewise, You were filled yesterday, and the day before, seek it
not now? But while you fill that beyond measure, even to bursting, from him you
turn away, when he asks but what is moderate; whereas you ought therefore to
pity him, because he is constrained to come to you every day. Yea, if nought else
incline you to him, you should pity him because of this; for by the constraint of

his poverty he is forced on these things, and does them. And you do not pity
him, because, being so spoken to, he feels no shame: the reason being, that his
want is too strong for him.
Nay, instead of pitying, you even make a show of him; and whereas God
has commanded to give secretly, you stand exposing publicly him that has
accosted you, and upbraiding him, for what ought to move your pity. Why, if you
are not minded to give, to what end add reproach, and bruise that weary and
wretched soul? He came as into a harbor, seeking help at your hands; why stir up
waves, and make the storm more grievous? Why do you condemn him of
meanness? What? Had he thought to hear such things, would he have come to
you? Or if he actually came foreseeing this, good cause therefore both to pity
him, and to shudder at your own cruelty, that not even so, when you see an
inexorable necessity laid upon him, do you become more gentle, nor judge him
to have a sufficient excuse for his importunity in the dread of hunger, but accuse
him of impudence: and yet have you often yourself practised greater impudence,
yea in respect of grievous matters. For while here the very impudence brings
with it ground of pardon, we, often doing things punishable, brazen it out: and
when we ought to bear all that in mind, and be humble, we even trample on
those miserable men, and when they ask medicines, we add to their wounds. I
say, if you will not give, why do you strike? If you will not be bounteous, why
be insolent?
"But he submits not to be put off in any other way." Well then, as that wise
man commanded, [Sirach 4:8] so do. "Answer him peaceable words with
meekness." For not of his own accord, surely, is he so very importunate. For
there is not, there cannot be, any man desiring to be put to shame for its own
sake. How much soever any may contend, I cannot yield ever to be convinced
that a man who was living in plenty would choose to beg.
6. Let no man then beguile us with arguments. But although Paul says, "If
any will not work, neither let him eat," [2 Thessalonians 3:10] to them he says it;
but to us he says not this, but, on the contrary, "Be not weary in well doing."