why He cut you off in severity was, that you might long to come back. The
reason why He showed goodness to you was, that you might continue in (he
does not say the faith, but) His goodness, that is, if you do things worthy of
God's love toward man. For there is need of something more than faith. You see
how he suffers neither these to lie low, nor those to be elated, but he also
provokes them to jealousy, by giving through them a power to the Jew to be set
again in this one's place, as he also had first taken the other's ground. And the
Gentile he put in fear by the Jews, and what had happened to them, lest they
should feel elated over it. But the Jew he tries to encourage by what had been
afforded to the Greek. For thou also, he says, will be cut off if you grow listless,
(for the Jew was cut off), and he will be grafted in if he be earnest, for thou also
wast grafted in. But it is very judicious in him to direct all he says to the Gentile,
as he is always in the habit of doing, correcting the feeble by rebuking the
stronger. This he does in the end of this Epistle too, when he is speaking of the
observance of meats. Then, he grounds this on what had already happened, not
upon what was to come only. And this was more likely to persuade his hearer.
And as he means to enter on consecutiveness of reasonings, such as could not be
spoken against, he first uses a demonstration drawn from the power of God. For
if they were cut off, and cast aside, and others took precedence of them in what
was theirs, still even now despair not.
"For God is able," he says, "to graft them in again," since He does things
beyond expectation. But if you wish for things to be in order, and reasons to be
consecutive, you have from yourselves a demonstration which more than meets
your wants.
Ver. 24. "For if you were cut out of the olive tree, which is wild by nature,
and were grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree, how much more shall
these, which be the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree."
If then faith was able to do what was contrary to nature, much more will it
that which is according to nature. For if this person, who was cut off from those
by nature his fathers, came contrary to nature unto Abraham, much more will

you be able to recover your own. For the Gentile's evil lot is according to nature
(he being by nature a wild olive), and the good contrary to nature (it being
contrary to nature for him to be grafted into Abraham), but your lot on the
contrary is the good by nature. For it is not upon another root, as the Gentile, but
on your own that you are to be fixed if you are minded to come back. What then
do you deserve, when after the Gentile had been able to do what was contrary to
nature, you are not able to do that which is according to nature, but hast given up
even this? Then as he had said "contrary to nature," and, "were grafted in," that
you may not suppose the Jew to have the advantage, he again corrects this by
saying that he also is grafted in. "How much more shall these," says he, "which
be the natural branches be grafted into their own olive-tree?" And again, "God
is able to graft them in." And before this he says, that if they "abide not still in
unbelief, they shall be also grafted in." And when you hear that he keeps
speaking of "according to nature," and "contrary to nature," do not suppose that
he means the nature that is unchangeable, but he tells us in these words of the
probable and the consecutive, and on the other hand of the improbable. For the
good things and the bad are not such as are by nature, but by temper and
determination alone. And consider also how inoffensive he is. For after saying
that thou also will be cut off, if you dost not abide in the faith, and these will be
grafted in, if they "abide not still in unbelief," he leaves that of harsh aspect, and
insists on that of kindlier sound, and in it he ends, putting great hopes before the
Jews if they were minded not to abide so. Wherefore he goes on to say,
Ver. 25. "For I would not, brethren, that you should be ignorant of this
mystery, lest ye should be wise your own conceits."
Meaning by mystery here, that which is unknown and unutterable, and has
much of wonder and much of what one should not expect about it. As in another
passage too he says, "Behold, I tell you a mystery. We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed." [1 Corinthians 15:51] What then is the mystery?
"That blindness in part has happened unto Israel." Here again he levels a
blow at the Jew, while seeming to take down the Gentile. But his meaning is