favored women, have given themselves to such as were plainer. Whence it is
evident that love depends not on beauty: for otherwise, surely, those would have
caught such as fell into it, before these. What then is its cause? 'For,' says he, 'if
it be not beauty that causes love, whence has it its beginning and its root? From a
wicked Demon?' It has it indeed, thence also, but this is not what we are
inquiring about, but whether we ourselves too be not the cause. For the plot is
not theirs only, but along with them our own too in the first place. For from no
other source is this wicked distemper so engendered as from habit, and flattering
words, and leisure, and idleness, and having nothing to do. For great, great is the
tyranny of habit, even so great as to be moulded into a necessity of nature. Now
if it be habit's to gender it, it is very evident that it is also [habit's] to extinguish
it. Certain it is at least that many have in this way ceased to be enamored, from
not seeing those they were enamored of. Now this for a little while indeed
appears to be a bitter thing and exceedingly unpleasant; but in time it becomes
pleasant, and even were they to wish it, they could not afterwards resume the
passion.
8. How then, when without habit one is taken captive at first sight? Here
also it is indolence of body, or self-indulgence, and not attending to one's duties,
nor being occupied in necessary business. For such an one, wandering about like
some vagabond, is transfixed by any wickedness; and like a child let loose, any
one that likes makes such a soul his slave. For since it is its wont to be at work,
when you stop its workings in what is good, seeing it cannot be unemployed, it
is compelled to engender what is otherwise. For just as the earth, when it is not
sown nor planted, sends up simply weeds; so also the soul, when it has nought of
necessary things to do, being desirous by all means to be doing, gives herself
unto wicked deeds. And as the eye never ceases from seeing, and therefore will
see wicked things, when good things are not set before it; so also does the
thought, when it secludes itself from necessary things, busy itself thereafter
about such as are unprofitable. For that even the first assault occupation and
thought are able to beat off, is evident from many things. When then you have

looked on a beautiful woman, and were moved towards her, look no more, and
you are delivered. 'And how shall I be able to look no more,' says he, 'when
drawn by that desire?' Give yourself to other things which may distract the soul,
to books, to necessary cares, to protecting others, to assisting the injured, to
prayers, to the wisdom which considers the things to come: with such things as
these bind down your soul. By these means, not only shall you cure a recent
wound, but shall wear away a confirmed and inveterate one easily. For if an
insult according to the proverb prevails with the lover to give over his love, how
shall not these spiritual charms much rather be victorious over the evil, if only
we have a mind to stand aloof. But if we are always conversing and associating
with those who shoot such arrows at us, and talking with them and hearing what
they say, we cherish the distemper. How then do you expect the fire to be
quenched, when day by day you stir up the flame?
And let this that we have said about habit be our speech unto the young;
since to those who are men and taught in heavenly wisdom, stronger than all is
the fear of God, the remembrance of hell, the desire of the kingdom of heaven;
for these are able to quench the fire. And along with these take that thought also,
that what you see is nothing else than rheum, and blood, and juices of
decomposed food. 'Yet a gladsome thing is the bloom of the features,' says one.
But nothing is more gladsome than the blossoms of the earth, and these too rot
and wither. Do not then in this either give heed to the bloom, but pass on further
inward in your thought, and stripping off that beauteous skin in your thought,
scan curiously what lies beneath it. For even the bodies of the dropsical shine
brightly, and the surface has nothing offensive; but still, shocked with the
thought of the humor stored within we cannot love such persons. 'But
languishing is the eye and glancing, and beautifully arched the brow, and dark
the lashes, and soft the eyeball, and serene the look.' But see how even this itself
again is nothing else than nerves, and veins, and membranes, and arteries. Think
too, I pray, of this beautiful eye, when diseased and old, wasting with despair,
swelling with anger, how hateful to the sight it is, how quickly it perishes, how