slumbering and a sleep, and with death he combined the resurrection when he
said "who shall raise him up?" No one indeed save he himself— wherefore also
Christ said "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again,"
[John 10:18] and again "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up."
[John 2:19] And what is meant by the words "you lied down and slumber as a
lion?" For as the lion is terrible not only when he is awake but even when he is
sleeping, so Christ also not only before the cross but also on the cross itself and
in the very moment of death was terrible, and wrought at that time great
miracles, turning back the light of the sun, cleaving the rocks, shaking the earth,
rending the veil, alarming the wife of Pilate, convicting Judas of sin, for then he
said "I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood;" [Matthew 27:4]
and the wife of Pilate declared "Have nothing to do with that just man, for I have
suffered many things in a dream because of Him." [Matthew 27:19] The
darkness took possession of the earth, and night appeared at midday, then death
was brought to nought, and his tyranny was destroyed: many bodies at least of
the saints which slept arose. These things the patriarch declaring beforehand, and
demonstrating that, even when crucified, Christ would be terrible, said "you lied
down and slumber as a lion." He did not say you shall slumber but you
slumbered, because it would certainly come to pass. For it is the custom of the
prophets in many places to predict things to come as if they were already past.
For just as it is impossible that things which have happened should not have
happened, so is it impossible that this should not happen, although it be future.
On this account they predict things to come under the semblance of past time,
indicating by this means the impossibility of their failure, the certainty of their
coming to pass. So also spoke David, signifying the cross; "They pierced my
hands and my feet." He did not say they "shall pierce" but "they pierced" "they
counted all my bones." And not only does he say this, but he also describes the
things which were done by the soldiers. "They parted my garments among
themselves, and upon my vesture did they cast lots." And not only this but he
also relates they gave Him gall to eat, and vinegar to drink. For he says "they

gave me gall for my food, and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." And
again another one says that they smote him with a spear, for "they shall look on
Him whom they pierced." [Zechariah 12:10] Esaias again in another fashion
predicting the cross said "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb
before his shearer is dumb, so opens he not his mouth." "In his humiliation his
judgment was taken away." [Isaiah 53:7-8]
2. Now observe I pray how each one of these writers speaks as if
concerning things already past, signifying by the use of this tense the absolute
inevitable certainty of the event. So also David, describing this tribunal, said,
"Why did the heathen rage and the people imagine vain things? The Kings of the
earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and
against his Christ." And not only does he mention the trial, and the cross, and
the incidents on the cross, but also him who betrayed him, declaring that he was
his familiar companion and guest. "For," he says, "he that eats bread with me did
magnify his heel against me." Thus also does he foretell the voice which Christ
was to utter on the cross saying "My God, My God why have you forsaken me?"
and the burial also does he describe: "They laid me in the lowest pit, in dark
places, and in the shadow of death." And the resurrection: "you shall not leave
my soul in hell, neither shall you suffer your Holy One to see corruption;" and
the ascension: "God has gone up with a merry noise, the Lord with the sound of
the trump." And the session on the right hand: "The Lord said to my Lord sit
thou on my right hand until I make your foes your footstool." But Esaias also
declares the cause; saying, "for the transgressions of my people is He brought to
death," [Isaiah 53:8] and because all have strayed like sheep, therefore is he
sacrificed. [Isaiah 53:6-7] Then also he adds mention of the result, saying "by his
stripes we have all been healed:" [Isaiah 53:5] and "he has borne the sins of
many." [Isaiah 53:12] The prophets then knew the cross, and the cause of the
cross and that which was effected by it, and the burial and the resurrection, and
the ascension, and the betrayal, and the trial, and described them all with
accuracy: and is He who sent them and commanded them to speak these things