show light both to the people, and to the Gentiles." [Acts 26:23] "And Festus
said with a loud voice"— in such anger and displeasure (did he speak)— "Paul,
you are beside yourself." What then said Paul? "I am not mad," etc. "For this
thing," he says, "was not done in a corner." (v. 25, 26.) Here he speaks of the
Cross, of the Resurrection: that the doctrine had come to every part of the world.
"King Agrippa," he says, "do you believe"— he does not say, the Resurrection,
but— "the prophets?" [Acts 26:27] Then he forestalls him, and says: "I know
that you believe?" [᾿] [Εν ὀλίγῳ] (i.e. within a little,) "almost thou persuades the
to be a Christian." [Acts 26:28] Paul did not understand what the phrase [ἐ] [ν
ὀλίγῳ] meant: he thought it meant [ἐ] [ξ ὀλιγου] (i.e. with little cost or trouble),
wherefore also he answers (as) to this: so unlearned was he. And he said not, I
do not wish (that), but, "I pray that not only thou, but also all that hear." Mark
how free from flattery his speech is.— "I pray that this day they may be all such
as I am, except these bonds." [Acts 26:29] He, the man that glories in his bonds,
that puts them forth as a golden chain, deprecates them for these men: for they
were as yet too weak in their minds, and it was rather in condescension that he
so spoke. For what could be better than those bonds which always in his Epistles
he prefers (to all things else), saying, "Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ:"
[Ephesians 3:1] and again, "On this account I am bound with this chain" [Acts
28:20], "but the word of God is not bound;" and, "Even unto bonds, as an evildoer." [2 Timothy 2:9] The punishment was twofold. For if indeed he had been
so bound, as with a view to his good, the thing would have carried with it some
consolation: but now (he is bound) both "as an evil-doer," and as with a view to
very ill consequences; yet for none of these things cared he.
Such is a soul winged with heavenly love. For if those who cherish the foul
(earthly passion which men call) love, think nothing either glorious of precious,
but those things alone which tend to gratify their lust, they think both glorious
and honorable, and their mistress is everything to them; much more do those,
who have been taken captive by this heavenly love, think nothing of the cost ([τὰ
ἐπιτίμια]). But if we do not understand what I am saying, it is no marvel, while

we are unskilled in this Divine Wisdom. For if any one be caught with the fire of
Christ's love, he becomes such as a man would become who dwelt alone upon
the earth, so utterly careless is he for glory or disgrace: but just as if he dwelt
alone, he would care for nothing, no more does he in this case. As for trials, he
so despises them, both scourges and imprisonments, as though the body in which
he suffers these things were another's and not his own, or as though he had got a
body made of adamant: while as for the sweet things of this life, he so laughs
them to scorn, is so insensible to them, as we are insensible of dead bodies,
being ourselves dead. He is as far from being taken captive by any passion, as
the gold refined in the fire and purified is free from alloy. For even as flies would
not dart into the midst of a flame, but fly from it, so the passions dare not even to
come near this man. Would that I could bring forward examples of all this from
among ourselves: but since we are at a loss for such, we must needs betake
ourselves to this same Paul. Observe him then, how he felt towards the whole
world. "The world is crucified unto me," he says, "and I unto the world"
[Galatians 6:14]: I am dead to the world, and the world is dead to me. And again:
"It is no longer I that live, but Christ lives in me." [ib. ] And, to show you that he
was as it were in solitude, and so looked upon the things present, hear himself
saying, "While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen." [2 Corinthians 4:18] What do you say? Answer me. And yet what
you say is the contrary; you see the things invisible, and the visible you see not.
Such eyes as you had gotten, such are the eyes which are given by Christ: for as
these bodily eyes see indeed the things that are seen, but things unseen they see
not: so those (heavenly eyes) do the contrary: none that beholds the invisible
things, beholds the visible: no one beholding the things seen, beholds the
invisible. Or is not this the case with us also? For when having turned our mind
inwards we think of any of the unseen things, our views become raised above the
things on earth. Let us despise glory: let us be willing to be laughed at rather
than to be praised. For he indeed who is laughed at is nothing hurt: but he who is
praised is much hurt. Let us not think much of those things which terrify men,