SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.3.

Accordingly, since the word knowledge implies certitude of
judgment as stated above (Article 1), if this certitude of the judgment
is derived from the highest cause, the knowledge has a special
name, which is wisdom: for a wise man in any branch of knowledge
is one who knows the highest cause of that kind of knowledge, and
is able to judge of all matters by that cause: and a wise man
"absolutely," is one who knows the cause which is absolutely
highest, namely God. Hence the knowledge of Divine things is called
"wisdom," while the knowledge of human things is called
"knowledge," this being the common name denoting certitude of
judgment, and appropriated to the judgment which is formed through
second causes. Accordingly, if we take knowledge in this way, it is a
distinct gift from the gift of wisdom, so that the gift of knowledge is
only about human or created things.
Reply to Objection 1: Although matters of faith are Divine and
eternal, yet faith itself is something temporal in the mind of the
believer. Hence to know what one ought to believe, belongs to the
gift of knowledge, but to know in themselves the very things we
believe, by a kind of union with them, belongs to the gift of wisdom.
Therefore the gift of wisdom corresponds more to charity which
unites man's mind to God.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument takes knowledge in the generic
acceptation of the term: it is not thus that knowledge is a special gift,
but according as it is restricted to judgments formed through
created things.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 1, Article 1), every
cognitive habit regards formally the mean through which things are
known, and materially, the things that are known through the mean.
And since that which is formal, is of most account, it follows that
those sciences which draw conclusions about physical matter from
mathematical principles, are reckoned rather among the
mathematical sciences, though, as to their matter they have more in
common with physical sciences: and for this reason it is stated in
Phys. ii, 2 that they are more akin to physics. Accordingly, since man
knows God through His creatures, this seems to pertain to
"knowledge," to which it belongs formally, rather than to "wisdom,"
to which it belongs materially: and, conversely, when we judge of
creatures according to Divine things, this pertains to "wisdom"
rather than to "knowledge."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the gift of knowledge is practical

knowledge?
Objection 1: It would seem that the knowledge, which is numbered
among the gifts, is practical knowledge. For Augustine says (De Trin.
xii, 14) that "knowledge is concerned with the actions in which we
make use of external things." But the knowledge which is concerned
about actions is practical. Therefore the gift of knowledge is
practical.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. i, 32): "Knowledge is
nought if it hath not its use for piety . . . and piety is very useless if it
lacks the discernment of knowledge." Now it follows from this
authority that knowledge directs piety. But this cannot apply to a
speculative science. Therefore the gift of knowledge is not
speculative but practical.
Objection 3: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost are only in the
righteous, as stated above (Question 9, Article 5). But speculative
knowledge can be also in the unrighteous, according to James 4:17:
"To him . . . who knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is a
sin." Therefore the gift of knowledge is not speculative but practical.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. i, 32): "Knowledge on her own
day prepares a feast, because she overcomes the fast of ignorance
in the mind." Now ignorance is not entirely removed, save by both
kinds of knowledge, viz. speculative and practical. Therefore the gift
of knowledge is both speculative and practical.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 9, Article 8), the gift of
knowledge, like the gift of understanding, is ordained to the certitude
of faith. Now faith consists primarily and principally in speculation,
in as much as it is founded on the First Truth. But since the First
Truth is also the last end for the sake of which our works are done,
hence it is that faith extends to works, according to Gal. 5:6:
"Faith . . . worketh by charity."
The consequence is that the gift of knowledge also, primarily and
principally indeed, regards speculation, in so far as man knows what
he ought to hold by faith; yet, secondarily, it extends to works, since
we are directed in our actions by the knowledge of matters of faith,