murder! Just as Herod imposed on himself that necessity by his oath, so also do
these. For such are the devil's (ways): under the pretext forsooth of piety he sets
his traps. "And they came to the chief priests," etc. And yet they ought to have
come (to the tribune), ought to have laid a charge, and assembled a court of
justice: for these are not the doings for priests, but for captains of banditti, these
are not the doings for rulers, but for ruffians. They endeavor also to corrupt the
ruler: but it was providentially ordered, to the intent that he also should learn of
their plot. For not (only) by their having nothing to say, but also by their secret
attempt, they convicted themselves that they were naught. It is likely too that
after (Paul had gone) the chief priests came to (the tribune) making their request,
and were put to shame. For of course he would not have liked either to deny or
to grant their request. How came he to believe (the young man's tale)? He did so
in consequence of what had already taken place; because it was likely they
would do this also. And observe their wickedness: they as good as laid a
necessity on the chief priests also: for if they undertook so great a thing
themselves, and engaged themselves in the whole risk, much more ought those
to do thus much. Do you observe, how Paul is held innocent by those that are
without, as was also Christ by Pilate? See their malice brought to naught: they
delivered him up, to kill and condemn him: but the result is just the contrary; he
is both saved, and held innocent. For had it not been so, he would have been
pulled in pieces: had it not been so, he would have perished, he would have been
condemned. And not only does (the tribune) rescue him from the rush (made
upon him), but also from much other (violence): see how he becomes a minister
to him, insomuch that without risk he is carried off safe with so large a force.
"And he called unto him two centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred
soldiers to go to Cæsarea, and horsemen threescore and ten, and spearmen two
hundred, at the third hour of the night; and provide them beasts, that they may
set Paul on, and bring him safe unto Felix the governor. And he wrote a letter
after this manner: Claudius Lysias unto the most excellent governor Felix sends
greeting. This man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them:

then came I with an army, and rescued him, having understood that he was a
Roman. And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I
brought him forth into their council: whom I perceived to be accused of
questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or
of bonds. And when it was told me how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I sent
straightway to you, and gave commandment to his accusers also to say before
you what they had against him. Fare well." [Acts 23:23-30]. See how the letter
speaks for him as a defence— for it says, "I found nothing worthy of death," but
as accusation against them (rather) than against him. "About to have been killed
of them:" so set upon his death were they. First, "I came with the army, and
rescued him:" then also "I brought him down unto them:" and not even so did
they find anything to lay to his charge: and when they ought to have been
stricken with fear and shame for the former act, they again attempt to kill him,
insomuch that again his cause became all the more clear. "And his accusers," he
says, "I have sent unto you:" that at the tribunal where these things are more
strictly examined, he may be proved guiltless.
(Recapitulation.) Let us look then to what has been said above. "I," he says,
"am a Pharisee:" then, that he may not seem to pay court, he adds, "Of the hope
and resurrection of the dead it is, that I am called in question." [Acts 23:6] From
this charge and calumny he commends himself. "For the Sadducees indeed," etc.
The Sadducees have no knowledge of anything incorporeal, perhaps not even
God; so gross ([παχεἵς]) are they: whence neither do they choose to believe that
there is a Resurrection. "And the scribes," etc. Look; the tribune also hears that
the Pharisees have acquitted him of the charges, and have given sentence
(manuscripts and Edd. [ἐ] [ψηφίσατο], "he gave sentence") in his favor, and with
greater confidence carries him off by force. Moreover all that was spoken (by
Paul) was full of right-mindedness ([φιλοσοφίας]). "And the night following the
Lord stood by him," etc. See what strong consolation! First he praises him, "As
you have testified to My cause in Jerusalem;" then He does not leave him to be
afraid for the uncertain issue of his journey to Rome: for there also, He says, you