concerning the unspeakable mercy of God toward man.
But what we should most observe is this, that whereas in each of the clauses
He had made mention of the whole of virtue, and in this way had included also
the forgetfulness of injuries (for so, that "His name be hallowed," is the
exactness of a perfect conversation; and that "His will be done," declares the
same thing again: and to be able to call God "Father," is the profession of a
blameless life; in all which things had been comprehended also the duty of
remitting our anger against them that have transgressed): still He was not
satisfied with these, but meaning to signify how earnest He is in the matter, He
sets it down also in particular, and after the prayer, He makes mention of no
other commandment than this, saying thus:
"For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father also will
forgive you." [Matthew 6:14]
So that the beginning is of us, and we ourselves have control over the
judgment that is to be passed upon us. For in order that no one, even of the
senseless, might have any complaint to make, either great or small, when
brought to judgment; on you, who art to give account, He causes the sentence to
depend; and "in what way soever you have judged for yourself, in the same,"
says He, "do I also judge you." And if you forgive your fellow servant, you shall
obtain the same favor from me; though indeed the one be not equal to the other.
For you forgive in your need, but God, having need of none: thou, your fellow
slave; God, His slave: thou liable to unnumbered charges; God, being without
sin. But yet even thus does He show forth His lovingkindness towards man.
Since He might indeed, even without this, forgive you all your offenses; but
He wills you hereby also to receive a benefit; affording you on all sides
innumerable occasions of gentleness and love to man, casting out what is brutish
in you, and quenching wrath, and in all ways cementing you to him who is your
own member.
For what can you have to say? That you have wrongfully endured some ill
of your neighbor? (For these only are trespasses, since if it be done with justice,

the act is not a trespass.) But you too are drawing near to receive forgiveness for
such things, and for much greater. And even before the forgiveness, you have
received no small gift, in being taught to have a human soul, and in being trained
to all gentleness. And herewith a great reward shall also be laid up for you
elsewhere, even to be called to account for none of your offenses.
What sort of punishment then do we not deserve, when after having
received the privilege, we betray our salvation? And how shall we claim to be
heard in the rest of our matters, if we will not, in those which depend on us,
spare our own selves?
10. "And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from the evil one: for
Yours is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen."
Here He teaches us plainly our own vileness, and quells our pride,
instructing us to deprecate all conflicts, instead of rushing upon them. For so
both our victory will be more glorious, and the devil's overthrow more to be
derided. I mean, that as when we are dragged forth, we must stand nobly; so
when we are not summoned, we should be quiet, and wait for the time of
conflict; that we may show both freedom from vainglory, and nobleness of spirit.
And He here calls the devil "the wicked one," commanding us to wage
against him a war that knows no truce, and implying that he is not such by
nature. For wickedness is not of those things that are from nature, but of them
that are added by our own choice. And he is so called pre-eminently, by reason
of the excess of his wickedness, and because he, in no respect injured by us,
wages against us implacable war. Wherefore neither said He, "deliver us from
the wicked ones," but, "from the wicked one;" instructing us in no case to
entertain displeasure against our neighbors, for what wrongs soever we may
suffer at their hands, but to transfer our enmity from these to him, as being
himself the cause of all our wrongs.
Having then made us anxious as before conflict, by putting us in mind of
the enemy, and having cut away from us all our remissness; He again encourages
and raises our spirits, by bringing to our remembrance the King under whom we