after the separation of the substantial form from matter, these
dimensions still remain the same: and consequently the matter
existing under those dimensions, whatever form it receive, is more
identified with that which was generated from it, than any other part
of matter existing under any form whatever. Thus the matter that will
be brought back to restore the human body will be the same as that
body's previous matter.
Reply to Objection 4: Even as a simple quality is not the substantial
form of an element, but its proper accident, and the disposition
whereby its matter is rendered proper to such a form; so the form of
a mixed body, which form is a quality resulting from simple qualities
reduced to a mean, is not the substantial form of the mixed body, but
its proper accident, and the disposition whereby the matter is in
need of the form. Now the human body has no substantial form
besides this form of the mixed body, except the rational soul, for if it
had any previous substantial form, this would give it substantial
being, and would establish it in the genus of substance: so that the
soul would be united to a body already established in the genus of
substance, and thus the soul would be compared to the body as
artificial forms are to their matter, in respect of their being
established in the genus of substance by their matter. Hence the
union of the soul to the body would be accidental, which is the error
of the ancient philosophers refuted by the Philosopher (De Anima ii,
2 [FP, Question 76, Article 1]). It would also follow that the human
body and each of its parts would not retain their former names in the
same sense, which is contrary to the teaching of the Philosopher (De
Anima ii, 1). Therefore since the rational soul remains, no substantial
form of the human body falls away into complete nonentity. And the
variation of accidental forms does not make a difference of identity.
Therefore the selfsame body will rise again, since the selfsame
matter is resumed as stated in a previous reply (ad 2).

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it will be identically the same man that

shall rise again?
Objection 1: It would seem that it will not be identically the same
man that shall rise again. For according to the Philosopher (De
Gener. ii): "Whatsoever things are changed in their corruptible
substance are not repeated identically." Now such is man's
substance in his present state. Therefore after the change wrought
by death the self-same man cannot be repeated .
Objection 2: Further, where there is a distinction of human nature
there is not the same identical man: wherefore Socrates and Plato
are two men and not one man, since each has his own distinct
human nature. Now the human nature of one who rises again is
distinct from that which he has now. Therefore he is not the same
identical man. The minor can be proved in two ways. First, because
human nature which is the form of the whole is not both form and
substance as the soul is, but is a form only. Now such like forms
pass away into complete nonentity, and consequently they cannot
be restored. Secondly, because human nature results from union of
parts. Now the same identical union as that which was heretofore
cannot be resumed, because repetition is opposed to identity, since
repetition implies number, whereas identity implies unity, and these
are incompatible with one another. But resurrection is a repeated
union: therefore the union is not the same, and consequently there is
not the same human nature nor the same man.
Objection 3: Further, one same man is not several animals:
wherefore if it is not the same animal it is not the same identical
man. Now where sense is not the same, there is not the same animal,
since animal is defined from the primary sense, namely touch. But
sense, as it does not remain in the separated soul (as some
maintain), cannot be resumed in identity. Therefore the man who
rises again will not be the same identical animal, and consequently
he will not be the same man.
Objection 4: Further, the matter of a statue ranks higher in the statue
than the matter of a man does in man: because artificial things
belong to the genus of substance by reason of their matter, but
natural things by reason of their form, as appears from the
Philosopher (Phys. ii, 1), and again from the Commentator (De Anima