able to make angels, though not in nature, certainly in will. For indeed if virtue
be absent, it is no advantage to be an angel by nature; and the Devil is a proof of
this, who was an angel once: but if virtue be present, it is no loss to be a man by
nature; and John is a proof of this, who was a man, and Elias who went up into
heaven, and all those who are about to depart there. For these indeed, though
with bodies, were not prevented from dwelling in heaven: while those others,
though without bodies, could not remain in heaven. Let no one then grieve or be
vexed with his nature as if it were a hindrance to him, but with his will. He (the
Devil) from being incorporeal became a lion: for lo! It says, "Our adversary, as
a roaring lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour" [1 Peter 5:8]: we
from being corporeal, become angels. For just as if a person, having found some
precious material, should despise it, as not being an artificer, it will be a great
loss to him, whether it be pearls, or a pearl shell, or any other such thing that he
has seen; so we likewise, if we are ignorant of our own nature, shall despise it
much: but if we know what it is, we shall exhibit much zeal, and reap the
greatest profits. For from this nature is wrought a king's robe, from this a king's
house, from this nature are fashioned a king's members: all are kingly. Let us not
then misuse our own nature to our hurt. He has made us "a little lower than the
angels," [Psalm 8:5], I mean, by reason of death: but even that little we have
now recovered. There is nothing therefore to hinder us from becoming near to
the angels, if we will. Let us then will it, let us will it, and having exercised
ourselves thoroughly, let us return honor to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, now and ever, world without end, Amen.

Homily 33 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XV. 13, 15
"And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and
brethren, hearken unto me: Symeon has declared how God at the first did visit
the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name. And to this agree the
words of the prophets."
This (James) was bishop, as they say, and therefore he speaks last, and
herein is fulfilled that saying, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every
word be established." [Deuteronomy 17:6; Matthew 18:16] But observe the
discretion shown by him also, in making his argument good from the prophets,
both new and old. For he had no acts of his own to declare, as Peter had and
Paul. And indeed it is wisely ordered that this (the active) part is assigned to
those, as not intended to be locally fixed in Jerusalem, whereas (James) here,
who performs the part of teacher, is no way responsible for what has been done,
while however he is not divided from them in opinion. (b) "Men and brethren,"
he says, "hearken unto me." Great is the moderation of the man. His also is a
more complete oration, as indeed it puts the completion to the matter under
discussion. (a) "Symeon," he says, "declared:" (namely,) in Luke, in that he
prophesied, "Which You have prepared before the face of all nations, a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of Your people Israel." (c) "How God at the
first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for His Name." [Luke
2:25] Then, since that (witness), though from the time indeed he was manifest,
yet had not authority by reason of his not being ancient, therefore he produces
ancient prophecy also, saying, "And to this agree the words of the Prophets, as it
is written: After this I wilt return, and will build again the tabernacle of David
which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it
up." [Acts 15:16] What? Was Jerusalem raised up? Was it not rather thrown