THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.5.

Moreover, the more grievous the sin, the more particularly did Christ
come to blot it out. But "greater" is said in two ways: in one way
"intensively," as a more intense whiteness is said to be greater, and
in this way actual sin is greater than original sin; for it has more of
the nature of voluntary, as has been shown (FS, Question 81, Article
1). In another way a thing is said to be greater "extensively," as
whiteness on a greater superficies is said to be greater; and in this
way original sin, whereby the whole human race is infected, is
greater than any actual sin, which is proper to one person. And in
this respect Christ came principally to take away original sin,
inasmuch as "the good of the race is a more Divine thing than the
good of an individual," as is said Ethic. i, 2.
Reply to Objection 1: This reason looks to the intensive greatness of
sin.
Reply to Objection 2: In the future award the pain of sense will not be
meted out to original sin. Yet the penalties, such as hunger, thirst,
death, and the like, which we suffer sensibly in this life flow from
original sin. And hence Christ, in order to satisfy fully for original
sin, wished to suffer sensible pain, that He might consume death and
the like in Himself.
Reply to Objection 3: Chrysostom says (De Compunctione Cordis ii,
6): "The Apostle used these words, not as if wishing to diminish
Christ's gifts, ample as they are, and spreading throughout the whole
world, but that he might account himself alone the occasion of them.
For what does it matter that they are given to others, if what are
given to you are as complete and perfect as if none of them were
given to another than yourself?" And hence, although a man ought
to account Christ's gifts as given to himself, yet he ought not to
consider them not to be given to others. And thus we do not exclude
that He came to wipe away the sin of the whole nature rather than the
sin of one person. But the sin of the nature is as perfectly healed in
each one as if it were healed in him alone. Hence, on account of the
union of charity, what is vouchsafed to all ought to be accounted his
own by each one.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.5.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether it was fitting that God should become

incarnate in the beginning of the human race?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was fitting that God should become
incarnate in the beginning of the human race. For the work of the
Incarnation sprang from the immensity of Divine charity, according
to Eph. 2:4,5: "But God (Who is rich in mercy), for His exceeding
charity wherewith He loved us . . . even when we were dead in sins,
hath quickened us together in Christ." But charity does not tarry in
bringing assistance to a friend who is suffering need, according to
Prov. 3:28: "Say not to thy friend: Go, and come again, and tomorrow
I will give to thee, when thou canst give at present." Therefore God
ought not to have put off the work of the Incarnation, but ought
thereby to have brought relief to the human race from the beginning.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (1 Tim. 1:15): "Christ Jesus came
into this world to save sinners." But more would have been saved
had God become incarnate at the beginning of the human race; for in
the various centuries very many, through not knowing God, perished
in their sin. Therefore it was fitting that God should become
incarnate at the beginning of the human race.
Objection 3: Further, the work of grace is not less orderly than the
work of nature. But nature takes its rise with the more perfect, as
Boethius says (De Consol. iii). Therefore the work of Christ ought to
have been perfect from the beginning. But in the work of the
Incarnation we see the perfection of grace, according to Jn. 1:14:
"The Word was made flesh"; and afterwards it is added: "Full of
grace and truth." Therefore Christ ought to have become incarnate at
the beginning of the human race.
On the contrary, It is written (Gal. 4:4): "But when the fulness of the
time was come, God sent His Son, made of a woman, made under
the law": upon which a gloss says that "the fulness of the time is
when it was decreed by God the Father to send His Son." But God
decreed everything by His wisdom. Therefore God became incarnate
at the most fitting time; and it was not fitting that God should
become incarnate at the beginning of the human race.
I answer that, Since the work of the Incarnation is principally
ordained to the restoration of the human race by blotting out sin, it is