Incarnation and the infinite mercy of the Redemption.
And it shares its mysteriousness with the doctrine of the Divine Eternity.
It is difficult to say which is most baffling to human comprehension, the
all-comprehending, simultaneous, successionless consciousness of the
Infinite One, or his trinal personality. Yet no theist rejects the doctrine of
the Divine eternity because of its mystery. The two doctrines are
antithetic and correlative. On one of the Northern rivers that flows
through a narrow chasm whose depth no plummet has sounded, there
stand two cliffs fronting each other, shooting their pinnacles into the blue
ether, and sending their roots down to the foundations of the earth. They
have named them Trinity and Eternity. So stand, antithetic and
confronting, in the Christian scheme, the trinity and eternity of God.
The translation of this treatise is the work of the Rev. Arthur West
Haddan, Hon. Canon of Worcester, who, according to a note of the
publisher, died while it was passing through the press. It has been
compared with the original, and a considerable number of alterations
made. The treatise is exceedingly difficult to render into English—
probably the most so of any in the author's writings. The changes in some
instances were necessary from a misconception of the original; but more
often for the purpose of making the meaning of the translator himself
more clear. It is believed that a comparison between the original and
revised translation will show that the latter is the more intelligible. At the
same time, the reviser would not be too confident that in every instance
the exact meaning of Augustin has been expressed, by either the
translator or reviser.
The annotations of the reviser upon important points in the treatise, it is
hoped, will assist the reader in understanding Augustin's reasoning, and
also throw some light upon the doctrine of the Trinity.
WILLIAM G. T. SHEDD.
NEW YORK, Feb. 1, 1887.

## TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

THE history of St. Augustin's treatise on the Trinity, as gathered by
Tillemont and others from his own allusions to it, may be briefly given. It
is placed by him in his Retractations among the works written (which in
the present case, it appears, must mean begun) in A.D. 400. In letters of
A.D. 410, 414, and at the end of A.D. 415 (Ad Consentium, Ep. 120, and
two Ad Evodium, Epp. 162, 169), it is referred to as still unfinished and
unpublished. But a letter of A.D. 412 (Ad Marcellinum, Ep. 143) intimates
that friends were at that time importuning him, although without
success, to complete and publish it. And the letter to Aurelius, which was
sent to that bishop with the treatise itself when actually completed,
informs us that a portion of it, while it was still unrevised and incomplete,
was in fact surreptitiously made public,—a proceeding which the letters
above cited postpone apparently until at least after A.D. 415. It was
certainly still in hand in A.D. 416, inasmuch as in Book XIII. a quotation
occurs from the 12th Book of the De Civitate Dei; and another quotation
in Book XV., from the 90th lecture on St. John, indicates most probably a
date of at least a year later, viz. A.D. 417. The Retractations, which refer to
it, are usually dated not later than A.D. 428. The letter to Bishop Aurelius
also informs us that the work was many years in progress, and was begun
in St. Augustin's early manhood, and finished in his old age. We may
infer from this evidence that it was written by him between A.D. 400,
when he was forty-six years old, and had been Bishop of Hippo about four
years, and A.D. 428 at the latest; but probably it was published ten or
twelve years before this date. He writes of it, indeed, himself, as if the
"nonum prematur in annum" very inadequately represented the amount
of deliberate and patient thought which a subject so profound and so
sacred demanded, and which he had striven to give to it; and as if, even at
the very last, he shrank from publishing his work, and was only driven to
do so in order to remedy the mischief of its partial and unauthorized
publication.
His motive for writing on the subject may be learned from the treatise