voices to the dancers, and who for the sake of three obols prostitute their
salvation to them, turning all things upside down! Are you distressed, O
beloved! For these things? Truly it were fitting that for these you should be glad,
and rejoice, and express your thanks to the Emperor, since his castigation has
proved a correction, his punishment a discipline, his wrath a means of
instruction! But that the Baths are shut up? Neither is this an intolerable
hardship, that those who lead a soft, effeminate, and dissolute life, should be
brought back, though unwillingly, to the love of true wisdom.
10. But is it complained of, that the Emperor has taken away the dignity of
the city, and has no more permitted it to be called a metropolis? But what was he
to do? Could he praise what had been done, and acknowledge it as a favour?
Then who would not have blamed him, for not showing even the outward form
of indignation? Do you see not that fathers do many things of a similar nature
towards their children? They turn away from them, and forbid them the table.
This also has the Emperor done by imposing such punishments as have nothing
in them hurtful, but carry with them much correction. Think what we expected,
and what has taken place, and then we shall especially discern the favour of
God! Do you grieve that the dignity of the city is taken away? Learn what the
dignity of a city is; and then you will know clearly, that if the inhabitants do not
betray it, no one else will be able to take away the dignity of a city! Not the fact
that it is a metropolis; nor that it contains large and beautiful buildings; nor that
it has many columns, and spacious porticoes and walks, nor that it is named in
proclamations before other cities, but the virtue and piety of its inhabitants; this
is a city's dignity, and ornament, and defence; since if these things are not found
in it, it is the most insignificant in the world, though it may enjoy unlimited
honour from Emperors! Do you wish to learn the dignity of your city? Do you
wish to know its ancestry? I will tell it exactly; not only that you may know, but
that you may also emulate. What then is after all the dignity of this city of ours?
"It came to pass, that the disciples were first called Christians at Antioch."
[Acts 11:26] This dignity, none of the cities throughout the world possesses, not

even the city of Romulus herself! For this it can look the whole world in the
face; on account of that love toward Christ, that boldness and virtue. Do you
wish farther to hear of a different dignity and commendation belonging to this
city? A grievous famine was once approaching, and the inhabitants of Antioch
determined, as far as each person had the means, to send relief to the Saints
dwelling at Jerusalem. [Acts 11:28-29] Behold a second dignity, charity in a time
of famine! The season did not make them niggardly, nor the expectation of the
calamity backward in helping; but when all are apt to be scraping up what is not
their own, then they distributed their own, not merely to those who were near,
but also to those who were living afar off! Do you see here the faith towards
God, and the love towards their neighbour? Would you learn another dignity of
this city? Certain men came down from Judæa to Antioch, defiling the doctrine
preached, and introducing Jewish observances. The men of Antioch did not bear
this novelty in silence. They did not hold their peace, but having come together,
and made an assembly, they sent Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem, and caused the
Apostles to provide that pure doctrines, cleared from all Jewish imperfection,
might be distributed throughout all parts of the world! This is the dignity of the
city! This is its precedence! This makes it a metropolis, not in the earth, but in
heaven; forasmuch as that all other honours are corruptible, and fleeting, and
perish with the present life, and often come to their end before the close of it, as
they have done in the present instance! To me, a city that has not pious citizens is
meaner than any village, and more ignoble than any cave.
11. And why do I speak of a city? For that you may exactly understand that
virtue alone is the ornament of the inhabitants, I will not speak to you of a city,
but I will endeavour to demonstrate this by bringing forward what is more
venerable than any city— the Temple of God which was in Jerusalem. For this
was the Temple in which were sacrifices and prayers and services; where was the
Holy of Holies, and the Cherubim, the Covenant, and the golden pot; the great
symbols of God's providence towards that people; where oracles from heaven
were constantly being received, where prophets became inspired, where the