SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.7.

Reply to Objection 1: As stated above, the need of this life is
regarded as a rule in so far as it is an end. Now it must be observed
that sometimes the end of the worker differs from the end of the
work, thus it is clear that the end of building is a house, whereas
sometimes the end of the builder is profit. Accordingly the end and
rule of temperance itself is happiness; while the end and rule of the
thing it makes use of is the need of human life, to which whatever is
useful for life is subordinate.
Reply to Objection 2: The need of human life may be taken in two
ways. First, it may be taken in the sense in which we apply the term
"necessary" to that without which a thing cannot be at all; thus food
is necessary to an animal. Secondly, it may be taken for something
without which a thing cannot be becomingly. Now temperance
regards not only the former of these needs, but also the latter.
Wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 11) that "the temperate
man desires pleasant things for the sake of health, or for the sake of
a sound condition of body." Other things that are not necessary for
this purpose may be divided into two classes. For some are a
hindrance to health and a sound condition of body; and these
temperance makes not use of whatever, for this would be a sin
against temperance. But others are not a hindrance to those things,
and these temperance uses moderately, according to the demands
of place and time, and in keeping with those among whom one
dwells. Hence the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 11) says that the "temperate
man also desires other pleasant things," those namely that are not
necessary for health or a sound condition of body, "so long as they
are not prejudicial to these things."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated (ad 2), temperance regards need
according to the requirements of life, and this depends not only on
the requirements of the body, but also on the requirements of
external things, such as riches and station, and more still on the
requirements of good conduct. Hence the Philosopher adds (Ethic.
iii, 11) that "the temperate man makes use of pleasant things
provided that not only they be not prejudicial to health and a sound
bodily condition, but also that they be not inconsistent with good," i.
e. good conduct, nor "beyond his substance," i.e. his means. And
Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. xxi) that the "temperate man
considers the need" not only "of this life" but also "of his station."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.7.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether temperance is a cardinal virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that temperance is not a cardinal virtue.
For the good of moral virtue depends on reason. But temperance is
about those things that are furthest removed from reason, namely
about pleasures common to us and the lower animals, as stated in
Ethic. iii, 10. Therefore temperance, seemingly, is not a principal
virtue.
Objection 2: Further, the greater the impetus the more difficult is it to
control. Now anger, which is controlled by meekness, seems to be
more impetuous than desire, which is controlled by temperance. For
it is written (Prov. 27:4): "Anger hath no mercy, nor fury when it
breaketh forth; and who can bear the violence [impetum] of one
provoked?" Therefore meekness is a principal virtue rather than
temperance.
Objection 3: Further, hope as a movement of the soul takes
precedence of desire and concupiscence, as stated above (FS,
Question 25, Article 4). But humility controls the presumption of
immoderate hope. Therefore, seemingly, humility is a principal virtue
rather than temperance which controls concupiscence.
On the contrary, Gregory reckons temperance among the principal
virtues (Moral. ii, 49).
I answer that, As stated above (Question 123, Article 11; Question 61,
Article 3), a principal or cardinal virtue is so called because it has a
foremost claim to praise on account of one of those things that are
requisite for the notion of virtue in general. Now moderation, which
is requisite in every virtue, deserves praise principally in pleasures
of touch, with which temperance is concerned, both because these
pleasures are most natural to us, so that it is more difficult to abstain
from them, and to control the desire for them, and because their
objects are more necessary to the present life, as stated above
(Article 4). For this reason temperance is reckoned a principal or
cardinal virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: The longer the range of its operation, the
greater is the agent's power [virtus] shown to be: wherefore the very
fact that the reason is able to moderate desires and pleasures that