that men should do to you, do ye also so them;" showing that He is not
introducing any thing new.

1 Corinthians 11:16
"But if any man seems to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither
the Churches of God."
It is then contentiousness to oppose these things, and not any exercise of
reason. Notwithstanding, even thus it is a measured sort of rebuke which he
adopts, to fill them the more with self-reproach; which in truth rendered his
saying the more severe. "For we," says he, "have no such custom," so as to
contend and to strive and to oppose ourselves. And he stopped not even here, but
also added, "neither the Churches of God;" signifying that they resist and oppose
themselves to the whole world by not yielding. However, even if the Corinthians
were then contentious, yet now the whole world has both received and kept this
law. So great is the power of the Crucified.
6. But I fear lest having assumed the dress, yet in their deeds some of our
women should be found immodest and in other ways uncovered. For therefore
also writing to Timothy Paul was not content with these things, but added others,
saying, "that they adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and
sobriety; not with braided hair, or gold." [1 Timothy 2:9] For if one ought not to
have the head bare, but everywhere to carry about the token of authority, much
more is it becoming to exhibit the same in our deeds. Thus at any rate the former
women also used both to call their husbands lords, [1 Peter 3:6] and to yield the
precedence to them. "Because they for their part," you say, "used to love their
own wives." I know that as well as you: I am not ignorant of it. But when we are
exhorting you concerning your own duties, let not theirs take all your attention.
For so, when we exhort children to be obedient to parents, saying, that it is
written, "honor your father and your mother," they reply to us, "mention also
what follows, 'and you fathers, provoke not your children to wrath,'" [Ephesians
6:1-4] And servants when we tell them that it is written that they should "obey

their masters, and not serve with eye-service," they also again demand of us
what follows, bidding us also give the same advice to masters. For Paul bade
them also, they saw, "to forbear threatening." But let us not do thus nor enquire
into the things enjoined on others, when we are charged with regard to our own:
for neither will your obtaining a partner in the charges free you from the blame:
but look to one thing only, how you may rid yourself of those charges which lie
against yourself. Since Adam also laid the blame on the woman, and she again
on the serpent, but this did in no wise deliver them. Do not thou, therefore, for
your part, say this to me now, but be careful with all consideration to render what
you owe to your husband: since also when I am discoursing with your husband,
advising him to love and cherish you, I suffer him not to bring forward the law
that is appointed for the woman, but I require of him that which is written for
himself. And do thou therefore busy yourself with those things only which
belong to you, and show yourself tractable to your consort. And accordingly if it
be really for God's sake that you obey your husband, tell me not of the things
which ought to be done by him, but for what things you have been made
responsible by the lawgiver, those perform with exactness. For this is especially
to obey God, not to transgress the law even when suffering things contrary to it.
And by the same rule, he that being beloved loves, is not reckoned to do any
great thing. But he that waits upon a person who hates him, this above all is the
man to receive a crown. In the same manner then do thou also reckon that if your
husband give you disgust, and thou endure it, you shall receive a glorious crown:
but if he be gentle and mild, what will there be for God to reward in you? And
these things I say, not bidding the husbands be harsh; but persuading the wives
to bear even with harshness in their husbands. Since when each is careful to
fulfil his own duty, his neighbor's part also will quickly follow: as when the wife
is prepared to bear even with rough behavior in the husband, and the husband
refrains from abusing her in her angry mood; then all is a calm and a harbor free
from waves.
7. So also was it with those of old time. Each was employed in fulfilling his