Hebrews 2:13
This indeed he brings forward naturally. But this "I will put my trust in
Him" [2 Samuel 22:3], what does it mean? For what follows this is also
[introduced] naturally. "Behold, I and the children which God has given Me."
[385 8:18] For as here He shows Himself a Father, so before, a Brother. "I will
declare Your name unto My brethren," He says.
And again he indicates the superiority and the great interval [between us],
by what follows [Hebrews 2:14]: "Since then the children," he says, "are
partakers of flesh and blood" you see where he says the likeness is? In reference
to the flesh), "in like manner He also Himself took part of the same." Let all the
Heretics be ashamed, let those hide their faces who say that He came in
appearance and not in reality. For he did not say, "He took part of these" only,
and then say no more; although had he said thus, it would have been sufficient,
but he asserted something more, adding "in like manner," not in appearance, he
means, or by an image (since in that case "in like manner" is not preserved) but
in reality; showing the brotherhood.

Hebrews 2:14
6. Next he sets down also the cause of the economy. "That through death,"
he says, "He might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil."
Here he points out the wonder, that by what the devil prevailed, by that was
he overcome, and the very thing which was his strong weapon against the world,
[namely], Death, by this Christ smote him. In this he exhibits the greatness of the
conqueror's power. Do you see how great good death has wrought?

Hebrews 2:15
"And should deliver them," he says, "who through fear of death were all
their lifetime subject to bondage." Why (he means) do ye shudder? Why do you
fear him that has been brought to nought? He is no longer terrible, but has been
trodden under foot, has been utterly despised; he is vile and of no account. [2
Timothy 1:10]
But what is "through fear of death were all their life-time subject to
bondage"? He either means this, that he who fears death is a slave, and submits
to all things rather than die; or this, that all men were slaves of death and were
held under his power, because he had not yet been done away; or that men lived
in continual fear, ever expecting that they should die, and being afraid of death,
could have no sense of pleasure, while this fear was present with them. For this
he hinted at in saying, "All their life-time." He here shows that the afflicted, the
harassed, the persecuted, those that are deprived of country and of substance and
of all other things, spend their lives more sweetly and more freely than they of
old time who were in luxury, who suffered no such afflictions, who were in
continual prosperity, if indeed these "all their life-time" were under this fear and
were slaves; while the others have been made free and laugh at that which they
shudder at. For this is now as if, when one was being led away to a captivity
leading to death, and in continual expectation of it, one should feed him up with
abundant dainties (something such as this was Death of old); but now, as if some
one taking away that fear together with the dainties, were to promise a contest,
and propose a combat that should lead no longer to death, but to a kingdom. Of
which number would you have wished to be— those who are fed up in the
prison-house, while every day looking for their sentence, or those who contend
much and labor willingly, that they may crown themselves with the diadem of
the kingdom? Do you see how he has raised up their soul, and made them