SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.5.

a sin. Hence the same authority adds: "Because every one that lives
or acts according to his unbelief, sins grievously."
Reply to Objection 2: Faith directs the intention with regard to the
supernatural last end: but even the light of natural reason can direct
the intention in respect of a connatural good.
Reply to Objection 3: Unbelief does not so wholly destroy natural
reason in unbelievers, but that some knowledge of the truth remains
in them, whereby they are able to do deeds that are generically good.
With regard, however, to Cornelius, it is to be observed that he was
not an unbeliever, else his works would not have been acceptable to
God, whom none can please without faith. Now he had implicit faith,
as the truth of the Gospel was not yet made manifest: hence Peter
was sent to him to give him fuller instruction in the faith.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there are several species of unbelief?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not several species of
unbelief. For, since faith and unbelief are contrary to one another,
they must be about the same thing. Now the formal object of faith is
the First Truth, whence it derives its unity, although its matter
contains many points of belief. Therefore the object of unbelief also
is the First Truth; while the things which an unbeliever disbelieves
are the matter of his unbelief. Now the specific difference depends
not on material but on formal principles. Therefore there are not
several species of unbelief, according to the various points which
the unbeliever disbelieves.
Objection 2: Further, it is possible to stray from the truth of faith in
an infinite number of ways. If therefore the various species of
unbelief correspond to the number of various errors, it would seem
to follow that there is an infinite number of species of unbelief, and
consequently, that we ought not to make these species the object of
our consideration.
Objection 3: Further, the same thing does not belong to different
species. Now a man may be an unbeliever through erring about
different points of truth. Therefore diversity of errors does not make
a diversity of species of unbelief: and so there are not several
species of unbelief.
On the contrary, Several species of vice are opposed to each virtue,
because "good happens in one way, but evil in many ways,"
according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv) and the Philosopher (Ethic. ii,
6). Now faith is a virtue. Therefore several species of vice are
opposed to it.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 55, Article 4; FS,
Question 64, Article 1), every virtue consists in following some rule
of human knowledge or operation. Now conformity to a rule happens
one way in one matter, whereas a breach of the rule happens in
many ways, so that many vices are opposed to one virtue. The
diversity of the vices that are opposed to each virtue may be
considered in two ways, first, with regard to their different relations
to the virtue: and in this way there are determinate species of vices
contrary to a virtue: thus to a moral virtue one vice is opposed by