Reply to 10. Although we should learn natural science after mathematics because the general
proofs of natural science require experience and time, still, since natural things fall under the
senses, they are by nature better known than the mathematical entities abstracted from sensible
matter.

### ARTICLE TWO

Does Natural Philosophy Treat of What Exists in Motion and Matter?

We proceed as follows to the second article:

It seems that natural science does not treat of things that exist in motion and matter, for

1. Matter is the principle of individuation, Now, according to Plato's doctrine, which is followed
by Porphyry, no science treats of individual things but only of universals. Therefore, natural
science does not treat of what is in matter.

2. Again, science pertains to the intellect. But the intellect knows by abstracting from matter and
from the conditions of matter. Therefore, no science can treat of what is not abstracted from
matter.

3. Again, as is clear in the Physics, the First Mover is considered in natural science. But The
First Mover is free from all matter. Therefore, natural science does not treat only of what is in
matter.

4. Again, every science has to do with what is necessary. But whatever is moved, as such is
contingent, as is proved in the Metaphysics. Therefore, no science can treat of what is subject to
motion; and so neither can natural science.

5. Again, no universal is subject to motion; for as is said in the beginning of the Metaphysics, it
is not man in general who is healed, but this man. But every science concerns that which is
universal. Therefore natural science does not treat of what is in motion.

6. Again, some of the things with which natural science deals are not subject to motion; for
instance, the soul, as is shown in De Anima, and the earth, as is proved in the De Caelo et
Mundo. What is more, all natural forms neither come into being nor perish, and for the same
reason they are not subject to motion, except accidentally. This is shown in the Metaphysics.
Therefore everything that physics considers is in motion.

7. Again, every creature is mutable for, as Augustine says, true immutability belongs to God
alone. So if it is the task of natural science to consider what is in motion, it will be its business to
consider all creatures, which clearly appears to be false.

On the contrary, it is the work of natural science to reach conclusions about natural things.
Now, natural things are those in which there is a principle of motion; and, as the Metaphysics
says, wherever there is motion there must be matter. So natural science treats of what is in
motion and matter.

Moreover, these must be some speculative science dealing with what is in matter and motion, for
otherwise the teaching of philosophy, which is knowledge of being, would be incomplete. Now
no other speculative science treats of these things, for neither mathematics nor metaphysics does