have failed of those good things, it would not bewail and lament enough. For
what language, what intellect, can represent that blessedness and virtue, that
pleasure, that glory, that happiness, that splendor? "What eye has not seen, and
ear has not heard, and what has not entered into the heart of man" [1
Corinthians 2:9], (he did not say, that they simply surpass [what we imagine];
but none has ever conceived) "the things which God has prepared for them that
love Him." For of what kind are those good things likely to be, of which God is
the Preparer and Establisher? For if immediately after He had made us, when we
had not yet done anything, He freely bestowed so great [favors], Paradise,
familiar intercourse with Himself, promised us immortality, a life happy and
freed from cares; what will He not bestow on those who have labored and
struggled so greatly, and endured on His behalf? For us He spared not His Only
Begotten, for us when we were enemies He gave up His own Son to death; of
what will He not count us worthy, having become His friends? What will He not
impart to us, having reconciled us to Himself?
7. He both is abundantly and infinitely rich; and He desires and earnestly
endeavors to obtain our friendship; we do not thus earnestly endeavor. What am
I saying, 'do not earnestly endeavor'? We do not wish to obtain the good things
as He wishes it. And what He has done shows that He wishes it more [than we].
For while, for our own sake, we with difficulty think lightly of a little gold: He,
for our sake, gave even the Son who was His own. Let us make use of the love
of God as we ought; let us reap the fruits of His friendship. For "you are My
friends" (he says) "if you do what I say to you." [John 15:14] How wonderful!
His enemies, who were at an infinite distance from Him, whom in all respects
He excels by an incomparable superiority, these He has made His friends and
calls them friends. What then should not one choose to suffer for the sake of this
friendship? For the friendship of men we often incur danger, but for that of God,
we do not even give up money. Our [condition] does indeed call for mourning,
for mourning and tears and wailings, and loud lamentation and beating of the
breast. We have fallen from our hope, we are humbled from our high estate, we

have shown ourselves unworthy of the honor of God; even after His benefits we
have become unfeeling, and ungrateful. The devil has stripped us of all our good
things. We who were counted worthy to be sons; we His brethren and fellowheirs have come to differ nothing from His enemies that insult Him.
Henceforward, what consolation shall there be for us? He called us to
Heaven, and we have thrust ourselves down to hell. "Swearing and lying and
stealing and adultery, are poured out upon the earth." [Hosea 4:2] Some "mingle
blood upon blood"; and others do deeds worse than blood-shedding. Many of
those that are wronged, many of those that are defrauded prefer ten thousand
deaths to the suffering such things: and except they had feared God, would even
have killed themselves, being so murderously disposed against themselves. Are
not these things then worse than blood-shedding?
8. "Woe is me, my soul! For the godly man is perished from the earth, and
there is none upright among men" [Micah 7:1-2, Septuagint]; let us also now cry
out, first about our own selves: but aid me in my lamentation.
Perhaps some are even disgusted and laugh. For this very cause ought we to
make our lamentations the more intense, because we are so mad and beside
ourselves, that we do not know that we are mad, but laugh at things for which we
ought to groan. O man! "There is wrath revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men" [Romans 1:18]; "God will come
manifestly: a fire will burn before Him, and round about Him will be a mighty
tempest." [Psalm 50:3] "A fire will burn before Him, and consume His enemies
on every side." [Psalm 97:3] "The day of the Lord is as a burning oven."
[Malachi 4:1] And no man lays up these things in his mind, but these
tremendous and fearful doctrines are more despised than fables, and are trodden
under foot. He that hears—there is no one: while they who laugh and make sport
are— all. What resource will there be for us? Whence shall we find safety? "We
are undone, we are utterly consumed", we have become the laughingstock of our
enemies, and a mockery for the heathen and the Demons. Now is the devil
greatly elated; he glories and is glad. The angels to whom we had been entrusted