bringing it, found (the colt), and sat upon it. And they took the small branches of
palm trees and olives, and strewed their garments in the way, showing that they
now had a higher opinion concerning Him than of a Prophet, and said,

John 12:13
"Hosannah, blessed is He that comes in the name of the Lord."
Do you see that this most choked them, the persuasion which all men had
that He was not an enemy of God? And this most divided the people, His saying
that He came from the Father. But what means,

John 12:15
"Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion."
Because all their kings had for the most part been an unjust and covetous
kind of men, and had given them over to their enemies, and had perverted the
people, and made them subject to their foes; "Be of good courage," It says, "this
is not such an one, but meek and gentle"; as is shown by the ass, for He entered
not with an army in His train, but having an ass alone.

John 12:16
"But this the disciples knew not, that it was written of Him."
2. Do you see that they were ignorant on most points, because He did not
reveal to them? For when He said, "Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will
raise it up" [John 2:19], neither then did the disciples understand. And another
Evangelist says, that "the saying was hid from them" [Luke 18:34], and they
knew not that He should rise from the dead. Now this was with reason concealed
from them, (wherefore another Evangelist says, that as they heard it from time to
time, they grieved and were dejected, and this because they understood not the
saying concerning the Resurrection,) it was with reason concealed, as being too
high for them: but why was not the matter of the ass revealed to them? Because
this was a great thing also. But observe the wisdom of the Evangelist, how he is
not ashamed to parade their former ignorance. That it was written they knew,
that it was written of Him they knew not. For it would have offended them if He
being a King were about to suffer such things, and be so betrayed. Besides, they
could not at once have taken in the knowledge of the Kingdom of which He
spoke; for another Evangelist says, that they thought the words were spoken of a
kingdom of this world. [Matthew 20:21]

John 12:17
"But the multitude bore witness that He had raised Lazarus."
For so many would not have been suddenly changed, unless they had
believed in the miracle.

John 12:19
"The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail
nothing? Behold, the world is gone after Him."
Now this seems to me to be said by those who felt rightly, but had not
courage to speak boldly, and who then would restrain the others by pointing to
the result, as though they were attempting impossibilities. Here again they call
the multitude "the world." For Scripture is wont to call by the name "world" both
the creation, and those who live in wickedness; the one, when It says, "Who
brings out His world by number" [Isaiah 40:26]; the other when It says, "The
world hates not you, but Me it hates." [John 7:7] And these things it is necessary
to know exactly, that we may not through the signification of words afford a
handle to the heretics.