eructations, the vomitings, the discharges downwards and upwards.
But go and see even these desires dead there, and those more violent lusts
that spring from these; I mean, those of impurity. For these too you will see all
overthrown, with their horses, with their beasts of burden. For the beast of
burden, and the weapon, and the horse of a filthy deed, is a filthy word. But you
will see such like horse and rider together, and their weapons thrown down; but
here quite the contrary, and souls cast down dead. But not at their meal only is
the victory of these holy men glorious, but in the other things also, in money, in
glory, in envy, in all diseases of the soul.
Surely does not this host seem to you mightier than that, and the meal
better? Nay, who will gainsay it? None, not even of those persons themselves,
though he be very mad. For this guides us on to Heaven, that drags to hell; this
the devil lays out, that Christ; for this luxury gives laws, and intemperance, for
that self-denial and sobriety, here Christ is present, there the devil. For where
there is drunkenness, the devil is there; where there are filthy words, where there
is surfeiting, there the devils hold their choirs. Such a table had that rich man,
therefore not even of a drop of water was he master.
But these have not such a table, but they already practise the ways of the
angels. They marry not, they are not given in marriage, neither do they sleep
excessively, nor live luxuriously, but except a few things they are even bodiless.
Now who is there that so easily overcomes his enemies as he that sets up a
trophy while at his dinner? Therefore also the prophet says, "You have prepared
a table before me, in the presence of them that trouble me." One could not be
wrong in repeating this oracle about this table. For nothing so troubles a soul as
disorderly concupiscence, and luxury, and drunkenness, and the evils that spring
from these; and this they know full well who have had experience thereof.
And if you were to learn also, whence this table is procured, and whence
that; then you would see well the difference between each. Whence then is this
procured. From countless tears, from widows defrauded, from orphans
despoiled; but the other from honest labor. And this table is like to a fair and

well-favored woman, needing nothing external, but having her beauty from
nature; but that to some ugly and ill-favored harlot, wearing much paint, but not
able to disguise her deformity, but the nearer she is, the more convicted. For this
too, when it is nearer to him that is at it, then shows its ugliness more. For look
not I tell you, at the banqueters, as they come only, but also as they go away, and
then you will see its ugliness. For that, as being free, suffers them that come unto
it to say nothing shameful; but this nothing seemly, as being a harlot, and
dishonored. This seeks the profit of him that is at it, that the hurt. And one
permits not to offend God, the other permits not but that we must offend Him.
Let us go away therefore unto those men. Thence we shall learn with how
many bonds we are encompassed. Thence shall we learn to set before ourselves a
table full of countless blessings, most sweet, without cost, delivered from care,
free from envy and jealousy and every disease, and full of good hope, and
having its many trophies. No turmoil of soul there, no sorrow, no wrath; all is
calm, all is peace.
For tell me not of the silence of them that serve in the houses of the rich,
but of the clamor of them that dine; I mean, not that which they make one to
another (for this too is worthy of derision), but that within, that in the soul, that
brings on them a great captivity, the tumults of the thoughts, the sleet, the
darkness, the tempest, by which all things are mingled and confused, and are like
to some night battle. But not in the monks' tents are such things as these; but
great is the calm, great the quietness. And that table is succeeded by a sleep that
is like death, but this by sobriety and wakefulness; that by punishment, this by
the kingdom of heaven, and the immortal rewards.
This then let us follow, that we may enjoy also the fruits thereof; unto
which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ to whom be glory and might world without end. Amen.