is that to which husbandry looks forward as the result of sowing or
any other process. Accordingly fruit is taken in a spiritual sense
sometimes for that which refreshes as being the last end: and
according to this signification we are said to enjoy [frui] God
perfectly in heaven, and imperfectly on the way. From this
signification we have fruition which is a dowry: but we are not
speaking of fruit in this sense now. Sometimes fruit signifies
spiritually that which refreshes only, though it is not the last end;
and thus the virtues are called fruits, inasmuch as "they refresh the
mind with genuine sweetness," as Ambrose says [De Parad. xiii]. In
this sense fruit is taken (Gal. 6:22): "The fruit of the Spirit is charity,
joy," etc. Nor again is this the sense in which we speak of fruit now;
for we have treated of this already [FS, Question 70, Article 1, ad 2].
We may, however, take spiritual fruit in another sense, in likeness to
material fruit, inasmuch as material fruit is a profit expected from the
labor of husbandry: so that we call fruit that reward which man
acquires from his labor in this life: and thus every reward which by
our labors we shall acquire for the future life is called a "fruit." In this
sense fruit is taken (Rm. 6:22): "You have your fruit unto
sanctification, and the end life everlasting." Yet neither in this sense
do we speak of fruit now, but we are treating of fruit as being the
product of seed: for it is in this sense that our Lord speaks of fruit
(Mt. 13:23), where He divides fruit into thirtyfold, sixtyfold, and
hundredfold. Now fruit is the product of seed in so far as the seed
power is capable of transforming the humors of the soil into its own
nature; and the more efficient this power, and the better prepared the
soil, the more plentiful fruit will result. Now the spiritual seed which
is sown in us is the Word of God: wherefore the more a person is
transformed into a spiritual nature by withdrawing from carnal
things, the greater is the fruit of the Word in him. Accordingly the
fruit of the Word of God differs from the aurea and the aureole, in
that the "aurea" consists in the joy one has in God, and the "aureole"
in the joy one has in the perfection of one's works, whereas the
"fruit" consists in the joy that the worker has in his own disposition
as to his degree of spirituality to which he has attained through the
seed of God's Word.
Some, however, distinguish between aureole and fruit, by saying that
the aureole is due to the fighter, according to 2 Tim. 2:5, "He . . . shall
not be crowned, except he strive lawfully"; whereas the fruit is due to
the laborer, according to the saying of Wis. 3:15, "The fruit of good
labors is glorious." Others again say that the "aurea" regards

conversion to God, while the "aureole" and the "fruit" regard things
directed to the end; yet so that the fruit regards the will rather, and
the aureole the body. Since, however, labor and strife are in the
same subject and about the same matter, and since the body's
reward depends on the soul's, these explanations of the difference
between fruit, aurea and aureole would only imply a logical
difference: and this cannot be, since fruit is assigned to some to
whom no aureole is assigned.
Reply to Objection 1: There is nothing incongruous if various
rewards correspond to the same merit according to the various
things contained therein. Wherefore to virginity corresponds the
aurea in so far as virginity is kept for God's sake at the command of
charity; the aureole, in so far as virginity is a work of perfection
having the character of a signal victory; and the fruit, in so far as by
virginity a person acquires a certain spirituality by withdrawing from
carnal things.
Reply to Objection 2: Fruit, according to the proper acceptation as
we are speaking of it now, does not denote the reward common to
martyrdom and virginity, by that which corresponds to the three
degrees of continency. This gloss which states that the hundredfold
fruit corresponds to martyrs takes fruit in a broad sense, according
as any reward is called a fruit, the hundredfold fruit thus denoting
the reward due to any perfect works whatever.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the aureole is an accidental reward
added to the essential reward, nevertheless not every accidental
reward is an aureole, but only that which is assigned to works of
perfection, whereby man is most conformed to Christ in the
achievement of a perfect victory. Hence it is not unfitting that
another accidental reward, which is called the fruit, be due
sometimes to the withdrawal from a carnal life.