the Church. When you take refuge in a Church, do not seek shelter merely in the
place but in the spirit of the place. For the Church is not wall and roof but faith
and life.
Do not tell me that the man having been surrendered was surrendered by
the Church; if he had not abandoned the Church he would not have been
surrendered. Do not say that he fled here for refuge and then was given up: the
Church did not abandon him but he abandoned the Church. He was not
surrendered from within the Church but outside its walls. Wherefore did he
forsake the Church? Did you desire to save yourself? Thou should have held fast
to the altar. There were no walls here, but there was the guarding providence of
God. Were you a sinner? God does not reject you: for "He came not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance." [Matthew 9:13] The harlot was saved when
she clung to His feet. Have ye heard the passage read today? Now I say these
things that you may not hesitate to take refuge in the Church. Abide with the
Church, and the Church does not hand you over to the enemy: but if you fly
from the Church, the Church is not the cause of your capture. For if you are
inside the fold the wolf does not enter: but if you go outside, you are liable to be
the wild beast's prey: yet this is not the fault of the fold, but of your own
pusillanimity. The Church has no feet. Talk not to me of walls and arms: for
walls wax old with time, but the Church has no old age. Walls are shattered by
barbarians, but over the Church even demons do not prevail. And that my words
are no mere vaunt there is the evidence of facts. How many have assailed the
Church, and yet the assailants have perished while the Church herself has soared
beyond the sky? Such might has the Church: when she is assailed she conquers:
when snares are laid for her she prevails: when she is insulted her prosperity
increases: she is wounded yet sinks not under her wounds; tossed by waves yet
not submerged; vexed by storms yet suffers no shipwreck; she wrestles and is
not worsted, fights but is not vanquished. Wherefore then did she suffer this war
to be? That she might make more manifest the splendour of her triumph. You
were present on that day, and you saw what weapons were set in motion against

her, and how the rage of the soldiers burned more fiercely than fire, and I was
hurried away to the imperial palace. But what of that? By the grace of God none
of those things dismayed me.
2. Now I say these things in order that you too may follow my example. But
wherefore was I not dismayed? Because I do not fear any present terrors. For
what is terrible? Death? Nay this is not terrible: for we speedily reach the
unruffled haven. Or spoliation of goods? "Naked came I out of my mother's
womb, and naked shall I depart;" [Job 1:21] or exile? "The earth is the Lord's
and the fullness thereof;" or false accusation? "Rejoice and be exceeding glad,
when men shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for great is your
reward in Heaven." [Matthew 5:12] I saw the swords and I meditated on
Heaven; I expected death, and I bethought me of the resurrection; I beheld the
sufferings of this lower world, and I took account of the heavenly prizes; I
observed the devices of the enemy, and I meditated on the heavenly crown: for
the occasion of the contest was sufficient for encouragement and consolation.
True! I was being forcibly dragged away, but I suffered no insult from the act;
for there is only one real insult, namely sin: and should the whole world insult
you, yet if you dost not insult yourself you are not insulted. The only real
betrayal is the betrayal of the conscience: betray not your own conscience, and
no one can betray you. I was being dragged away and I saw the events— or
rather I saw my words turned into events, I saw my discourse which I had
uttered in words being preached in the market-place through the medium of
actual events. What kind of discourse? The same which I was always repeating.
The wind has blown and the leaves have fallen. "The grass has withered and the
flower has faded." [Isaiah 40:8] The night has departed and the day has dawned;
the shadow has been proved vain and the truth has appeared. They mounted up
to the sky, and they came down to the level of earth: for the waves which were
swelling high have been laid low by means of merely human events. How? The
things which were taking place were a lesson. And I said to myself will posterity
learn self-control? Or before two days have passed by will these events have