Reply to Objection 1: An angel is called "intellect" and "mind,"
because all his knowledge is intellectual: whereas the knowledge of
a soul is partly intellectual and partly sensitive.
Reply to Objection 2: A simple form which is pure act cannot be the
subject of accident, because subject is compared to accident as
potentiality is to act. God alone is such a form: and of such is
Boethius speaking there. But a simple form which is not its own
existence, but is compared to it as potentiality is to act, can be the
subject of accident; and especially of such accident as follows the
species: for such accident belongs to the form---whereas an
accident which belongs to the individual, and which does not belong
to the whole species, results from the matter, which is the principle
of individuation. And such a simple form is an angel.
Reply to Objection 3: The power of matter is a potentiality in regard
to substantial being itself, whereas the power of operation regards
accidental being. Hence there is no comparison.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether there is an active and a passive intellect

in an angel?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is both an active and a passive
intellect in an angel. The Philosopher says (De Anima iii, text. 17)
that, "in the soul, just as in every nature, there is something whereby
it can become all things, and there is something whereby it can make
all things." But an angel is a kind of nature. Therefore there is an
active and a passive intellect in an angel.
Objection 2: Further, the proper function of the passive intellect is to
receive; whereas to enlighten is the proper function of the active
intellect, as is made clear in De Anima iii, text. 2,3,18. But an angel
receives enlightenment from a higher angel, and enlightens a lower
one. Therefore there is in him an active and a passive intellect.
On the contrary, The distinction of active and passive intellect in us
is in relation to the phantasms, which are compared to the passive
intellect as colors to the sight; but to the active intellect as colors to
the light, as is clear from De Anima iii, text. 18. But this is not so in
the angel. Therefore there is no active and passive intellect in the
angel.
I answer that, The necessity for admitting a passive intellect in us is
derived from the fact that we understand sometimes only in
potentiality, and not actually. Hence there must exist some power,
which, previous to the act of understanding, is in potentiality to
intelligible things, but which becomes actuated in their regard when
it apprehends them, and still more when it reflects upon them. This
is the power which is denominated the passive intellect. The
necessity for admitting an active intellect is due to this---that the
natures of the material things which we understand do not exist
outside the soul, as immaterial and actually intelligible, but are only
intelligible in potentiality so long as they are outside the soul.
Consequently it is necessary that there should be some power
capable of rendering such natures actually intelligible: and this
power in us is called the active intellect.
But each of these necessities is absent from the angels. They are
neither sometimes understanding only in potentiality, with regard to
such things as they naturally apprehend; nor, again, are their