Sodomites, if we will not receive the strangers that come in unto us; I mean,
when He commanded to shake off the very dust: and very fitly. For as to the
Sodomites, although they committed a great transgression, yet it was before the
law and grace; but we, after so much care shown towards us, of what indulgence
should we be worthy, showing so much inhospitality, and shutting our doors
against them that are in need, and before our doors our ears? Or rather not
against the poor only, but against the apostles themselves? For therefore we do it
to the poor, because we do it to the very apostles. For whereas Paul is read, and
you attend not; whereas John preaches, and you hear not: when will you receive
a poor man, who will not receive an apostle?
In order then that both our houses may be continually open to the one, and
our ears to the others, let us purge away the filth from the ears of our soul. For as
filth and mud close up the ears of our flesh, so do the harlot's songs, and worldly
news, and debts, and the business of usury and loans, close up the ear of the
mind, worse than any filth; nay rather, they do not close it up only, but also make
it unclean. And they are putting dung in your ears, who tell you of these things.
And that which the barbarian threatened, saying, "You shall eat your own dung,"
and what follows; [Isaiah 36:12] this do these men also make you undergo, not
in word, but in deeds; or rather, somewhat even much worse. For truly those
songs are more loathsome even than all this; and what is yet worse, so far from
feeling annoyance when you hear them, you rather laugh, when you ought to
abominate them and fly.
But if they be not abominable, go down unto the stage, imitate that which
you praise, or rather, do thou merely take a walk with him that is exciting that
laugh. Nay, you could not bear it. Why then bestow on him so great honor? Yea,
while the laws that are enacted by the Gentiles would have them to be
dishonored, you receive them with your whole city, like ambassadors and
generals, and dost convoke all men, to receive dung in their ears. And your
servant, if he say anything filthy in your hearing, will receive stripes in
abundance; and be it a son, a wife, whoever it may, that does as I have said, you

call the act an affront; but if worthless fellows, that deserve the scourge, should
invite you to hear the filthy words, not only are you not indignant, thou dost
even rejoice and applaud. And what could be equal to this folly?
But dost you yourself never utter these base words? Why what is the profit?
Or rather, this very fact, whence is it manifest? For if you did not utter these
things, neither would you at all laugh at hearing them, nor would you run with
such zeal to the voice that makes you ashamed.
For tell me, are you pleased at hearing men blaspheme? Do you not rather
shudder, and stop your ears? Surely I think you do. Why so? Because you
blaspheme not yourself. Just so do thou act with respect to filthy talking also;
and if you would show us clearly, that you have no pleasure in filthy speaking,
endure not so much as to hear them. For when will you be able to become good,
bred up as you are with such sounds in your ears? When will you venture to
undergo such labors as chastity requires, now that you are falling gradually away
through this laughter, these songs, and filthy words? Yea, it is a great thing for a
soul that keeps itself pure from all this, to be able to become grave and chaste;
how much more for one that is nourished up in such hearings? Do you not know,
that we are of the two more inclined to evil? While then we make it even an art,
and a business, when shall we escape that furnace?
8. Heardest thou not what Paul says, "Rejoice in the Lord?"
[Philippians 4:4] He said not, "in the devil." When then will you be able to hear
Paul? When, to gain a sense of your wrong actions? drunken as you are, ever and
incessantly, with the spectacle I was speaking of. For your having come here is
nothing wonderful nor great; or rather it is wonderful. For here you come any
how, and so as just to satisfy a scruple, but there with diligence and speed, and
great readiness. And it is evident from what you bring home, on returning
thence.
For even all the mire that is there poured out for you, by the speeches, by
the songs, by the laughter, you collect and take every man to his home, or rather
not to his home only, but every man even into his own mind.