were not into existence may well be trusted when it speaks of their nature. What
then says it? That what is effected is a Generation . If any ask, "How," stop his
mouth with the declaration of God, which is the strongest and a plain proof. If
any enquire, "Why is water included?" let us also in return ask, "Wherefore was
earth employed at the beginning in the creation of man?" for that it was possible
for God to make man without earth, is quite plain to every one. Be not then overcurious.
That the need of water is absolute and indispensable, you may learn in this
way. On one occasion, when the Spirit had flown down before the water was
applied, the Apostle did not stay at this point, but, as though the water were
necessary and not superfluous, observe what he says; "Can any man forbid
water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as
well as we?" [Acts 10:47]
What then is the use of the water? This too I will tell you hereafter, when I
reveal to you the hidden mystery. There are also other points of mystical
teaching connected with the matter, but for the present I will mention to you one
out of many. What is this one? In Baptism are fulfilled the pledges of our
covenant with God; burial and death, resurrection and life; and these take place
all at once. For when we immerse our heads in the water, the old man is buried
as in a tomb below, and wholly sunk forever; then as we raise them again, the
new man rises in its stead. As it is easy for us to dip and to lift our heads again,
so it is easy for God to bury the old man, and to show forth the new. And this is
done thrice, that you may learn that the power of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost fulfills all this. To show that what we say is no conjecture, hear Paul
saying, "We are buried with Him by Baptism into death": and again, "Our old
man is crucified with Him": and again, "We have been planted together in the
likeness of His death." [Romans 6:4-6] And not only is Baptism called a "cross,"
but the "cross" is called "Baptism." "With the Baptism," says Christ, "that I am
baptized withal shall you be baptized" [Mark 10:39]: and, "I have a Baptism to
be baptized with" [Luke 12:50] (which you know not); for as we easily dip and

lift our heads again, so He also easily died and rose again when He willed or
rather much more easily, though He tarried the three days for the dispensation of
a certain mystery.
3. Let us then who have been deemed worthy of such mysteries show forth
a life worthy of the Gift, that is, a most excellent conversation; and do ye who
have not yet been deemed worthy, do all things that you may be so, that we may
be one body, that we may be brethren. For as long as we are divided in this
respect, though a man be father, or son, or brother, or anything else, he is no true
kinsman, as being cut off from that relationship which is from above. What
advantages it to be bound by the ties of earthly family, if we are not joined by
those of the spiritual? What profits nearness of kin on earth, if we are to be
strangers in heaven? For the Catechumen is a stranger to the Faithful. He has not
the same Head, he has not the same Father, he has not the same City, nor Food,
nor Raiment, nor Table, nor House, but all are different; all are on earth to the
former, to the latter all are in heaven. One has Christ for his King; the other, sin
and the devil; the food of one is Christ, of the other, that meat which decays and
perishes; one has worms' work for his raiment, the other the Lord of angels;
heaven is the city of one, earth of the other. Since then we have nothing in
common, in what, tell me, shall we hold communion? Did we remove the same
pangs, did we come forth from the same womb? This has nothing to do with that
most perfect relationship. Let us then give diligence that we may become
citizens of the city which is above. How long do we tarry over the border, when
we ought to reclaim our ancient country? We risk no common danger; for if it
should come to pass, (which God forbid!) that through the sudden arrival of
death we depart hence uninitiated, though we have ten thousand virtues, our
portion will be no other than hell, and the venomous worm, and fire
unquenchable, and bonds indissoluble. But God grant that none of those who
hear these words experience that punishment! And this will be, if having been
deemed worthy of the sacred mysteries, we build upon that foundation gold, and
silver, and precious stones; for so after our departure hence we shall be able to