SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether men are bound to pay tithes of all

things?
Objection 1: It would seem that men are not bound to give tithes of
all things. The paying of tithes seems to be an institution of the Old
Law. Now the Old Law contains no precept about personal tithes, viz.
those that are payable on property acquired by one's own act, for
instance by commerce or soldiering. Therefore no man is bound to
pay tithes on such things.
Objection 2: Further, it is not right to make oblations of that which is
ill-gotten, as stated above (Question 86, Article 3). Now oblations,
being offered to God immediately, seem to be more closely
connected with the divine worship than tithes which are offered to
the ministers. Therefore neither should tithes be paid on ill-gotten
goods.
Objection 3: Further, in the last chapter of Leviticus (30,32) the
precept of paying tithes refers only to "corn, fruits of trees" and
animals "that pass under the shepherd's rod." But man derives a
revenue from other smaller things, such as the herbs that grow in his
garden and so forth. Therefore neither on these things is a man
bound to pay tithes.
Objection 4: Further, man cannot pay except what is in his power.
Now a man does not always remain in possession of all his profit
from land and stock, since sometimes he loses them by theft or
robbery; sometimes they are transferred to another person by sale;
sometimes they are due to some other person, thus taxes are due to
princes, and wages due to workmen. Therefore one ought not to pay
tithes on such like things.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 28:22): "Of all things that Thou
shalt give to me, I will offer tithes to Thee."
I answer that, In judging about a thing we should look to its principle.
Now the principle of the payment of tithes is the debt whereby carnal
things are due to those who sow spiritual things, according to the
saying of the Apostle (1 Cor. 9:11), "If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things?"
thus implying that on the contrary "it is no great matter if we reap

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.3.

your carnal things". For this debt is the principle on which is based
the commandment of the Church about the payment of tithes. Now
whatever man possesses comes under the designation of carnal
things. Therefore tithes must be paid on whatever one possesses.
Reply to Objection 1: In accordance with the condition of that people
there was a special reason why the Old Law did not include a
precept about personal tithes; because, to wit, all the other tribes
had certain possessions wherewith they were able to provide a
sufficient livelihood for the Levites who had no possessions, but
were not forbidden to make a profit out of other lawful occupations
as the other Jews did. On the other hand the people of the New Law
are spread abroad throughout the world, and many of them have no
possessions, but live by trade, and these would contribute nothing
to the support of God's ministers if they did not pay tithes on their
trade profits. Moreover the ministers of the New Law are more
strictly forbidden to occupy themselves in money-making trades,
according to 2 Tim. 2:4, "No man being a soldier to God, entangleth
himself with secular business." Wherefore in the New Law men are
bound to pay personal tithes, according to the custom of their
country and the needs of the ministers: hence Augustine, whose
words are quoted 16, qu. 1, cap. Decimae, says [Append. Serm.
cclxxvii]: "Tithes must be paid on the profits of soldiering, trade or
craft."
Reply to Objection 2: Things are ill-gotten in two ways. First,
because the getting itself was unjust: such, for instance, are things
gotten by robbery, theft or usury: and these a man is bound to
restore, and not to pay tithes on them. If, however, a field be bought
with the profits of usury, the usurer is bound to pay tithes on the
produce, because the latter is not gotten usuriously but given by
God. On the other hand certain things are said to be ill-gotten,
because they are gotten of a shameful cause, for instance of
whoredom or stage-playing, and the like. Such things a man is not
bound to restore, and consequently he is bound to pay tithes on
them in the same way as other personal tithes. Nevertheless the
Church must not accept the tithe so long as those persons remain in
sin, lest she appear to have a share in their sins: but when they have
done penance, tithes may be accepted from them on these things.
Reply to Objection 3: Things directed to an end must be judged
according to their fittingness to the end. Now the payment of tithes is
due not for its own sake, but for the sake of the ministers, to whose