proper occasion, caused Phinehas, who committed it, to be honored with the
priesthood. [Numbers 25:8] For that killing is a work of him whom I just now
mentioned, hear what Christ says; "You will do the works of your Father; he was
a manslayer from the beginning." [John 8:44] But Phinehas became a manslayer,
and "it was counted unto him" (so He speaks) "for righteousness:" and Abraham
again on becoming not a man-slayer only, but (which was far worse) the slayer
of his child, won more and more approbation. And Peter too wrought a twofold
slaughter, nevertheless what he did was of the Spirit. [Acts v]
Let us not then examine simply the acts, but the season too, and the causes,
and the mind, and the difference of persons, and whatsoever else may
accompany them, these let us search out with all exactness: for there is no
arriving at the truth otherwise.
And let us be diligent, if we would attain unto the kingdom, to show forth
something more than the old commandments; since we cannot otherwise lay
hold of the things of Heaven. For if we arrive but at the same measure, that of
the ancients, we shall stand without that threshold; for "unless your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you
cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 5:20]
6. Yet, although so heavy a threat is set down, there are some who so far
from over-passing this righteousness, even come short of it; so far from shunning
oaths, they even swear falsely; so far from avoiding an unchaste gaze, they even
fall into the very act of wickedness. And all the rest of the things which are
forbidden, they dare to do, as though past feeling: waiting for one thing only, the
day of punishment, and the time when they are to pay the most extreme penalty
for their misdoings. And this is the portion of those only who have ended their
lives in wickedness. For these have reason to despair, and thenceforth to expect
nothing else but punishment; whereas they who are yet here, may have power
both to renew the fight and to conquer and be crowned with ease.
Despond not therefore, O man, neither put away your noble earnestness; for
in truth the things are not grievous, which are enjoined. What trouble is it, I pray

you, to shun an oath? What, does it cost any money? Is it sweat and hardship? It
is enough to have willed only, and the whole is done.
But if you allege to me your habit; for this very reason most of all do I say,
that your doing right is easy. For if you bring yourself to another habit, you had
effected all.
Consider, for example, how among the Greeks, in many instances, persons
lisping have entirely cured by much practice their halting tongue; while others,
who were used to shrug up their shoulders in an unseemly way, and to be
continually moving them, by putting a sword over them, have broken themselves
of it.
For since you are not persuaded out of the Scriptures, I am compelled to
shame you by them that are without. This God also did unto the Jews, when He
said, "Go ye forth unto the Isles of Chittim, and send unto Kedar, and know if
nations will change their gods; which yet are no gods." And to the brutes
likewise He sends us oftentimes, saying on this wise, "Go to the ant, thou
sluggard, and emulate her ways:" and "go forth to the bee."
This therefore I also now say unto you; consider the philosophers of the
Greeks; and then you will know of how great punishment we are worthy, who
disobey the laws of God: in that they for seemliness before men have taken
exceeding pains, and you bestow not the same diligence, no, not for the things of
Heaven.
But if you should reply, "Habit has a wonderful power to beguile even
those who are very much in earnest:" this I likewise acknowledge; however,
there is another thing which I say with it; that as it is powerful to beguile, so also
is it easy to be corrected. For if you will set over yourself at home many to watch
you, such as your servant, your wife, your friend, you will easily break off from
the bad habits, being hard pressed and closely restrained by all. If you succeed in
doing this for ten days only, you will after that no longer need any further time,
but all will be secured to you, rooted anew in the firmness of the most excellent
habit.