not be ignorant of him who emitted them, any more than rays [may be supposed to be] of the sun.
It is impossible, therefore, that the Sophia (wisdom) of God, she who is within the Pleroma, inasmuch
as she has been produced in such a manner, should have fallen under the influence of passion, and
conceived such ignorance. But it is possible that that Sophia (wisdom) who pertains to [the scheme]
of Valentinus, inasmuch as she is a production of the devil, should fall into every kind of passion,
and exhibit the profoundest ignorance. For when they themselves bear testimony concerning their
mother, to the effect that she was the offspring of an erring Æon, we need no longer search for a
reason why the sons of such a mother should be ever swimming in the depths of ignorance.
9. I am not aware that, besides these productions [which have been mentioned], they are able
to speak of any other; indeed, they have not been known to me (although I have had very frequent
discussions with them concerning forms of this kind) as ever setting forth any other peculiar kind
of being as produced [in the manner under consideration]. This only they maintain, that each one
of these was so produced as to know merely that one who produced him, while he was ignorant of
the one who immediately preceded. But they do not in this matter go forward [in their account]
with any kind of demonstration as to the manner in which these were produced, or how such a thing
could take place among spiritual beings. For, in whatsoever way they may choose to go forward,
they will feel themselves bound (while, as regards the truth, they depart entirely from right
reason) to proceed so far as to maintain that their Word, who springs from the Nous of the Propator,
—to maintain, I say, that he was produced in a state of degeneracy. For [they hold] that perfect
Nous, previously begotten by the perfect Bythus, was not capable of rendering that production
which issued from him perfect, but [could only bring it forth] utterly blind to the knowledge and
greatness of the Father. They also maintain that the Saviour exhibited an emblem of this mystery
in the case of that man who was blind from his birth, since the Æon was in this manner produced
by Monogenes blind, that is, in ignorance, thus falsely ascribing ignorance and blindness to the
Word of God, who, according to their own theory, holds the second [place of] production from the
Propator. Admirable sophists, and explorers of the sublimities of the unknown Father, and rehearsers
of those super-celestial mysteries "which the angels desire to look into!"—that they may learn
that from the Nous of that Father who is above all, the Word was produced blind, that is, ignorant
of the Father who produced him!
10. But, ye miserable sophists, how could the Nous of the Father, or rather the very Father
Himself, since He is Nous and perfect in all things, have produced his own Logos as an imperfect
and blind Æon, when He was able also to produce along with him the knowledge of the Father?