was in many respects unlawful.
What is, "of a carnal commandment"? Circumcise the flesh, it says; anoint
the flesh; wash the flesh; purify the flesh; shave the flesh; bind upon the flesh;
cherish the flesh; rest as to the flesh. And again its blessings, what are they?
Long life for the flesh; milk and honey for the flesh; peace for the flesh; luxury
for the flesh. From this law Aaron received the priesthood; Melchisedec however
not so.

Hebrews 7:15-17
"And it is yet far more evident, if after the similitude of Melchisedec there
arises another priest." What is evident? The interval between the two
priesthoods, the difference; how much superior He is "who was made not
according to the law of a carnal commandment." (Who? Melchisedec? Nay; but
Christ.) "But according to the power of an endless life. For He testifies, You are
a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec"; that is, not for a time, nor
having any limit, "but according to the power of an endless life," that is, by
means of power, by means of "endless life."
And yet this does not follow after, "who was made not according to the law
of a carnal commandment": for what would follow would be to say, "but
according to that of a spiritual one." However by "carnal," he implied
temporary. As he says also in another place, carnal ordinances imposed until the
time of reformation. [Hebrews 9:10]
"According to the power of life," that is, because He lives by His own
power.
4. He had said, that there is also a change of law, and up to this point he has
shown it; henceforward he enquires into the cause, that which above all gives
full assurance to men's minds, [I mean] the knowing the cause thoroughly; and it
leads us more to faith when we have learned also the cause, and the principle
according to which [the thing] comes to pass.

Hebrews 7:18
"For there is verily" (he says) "a disannulling of the commandment going
before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof." Here the Heretics press
on. But listen attentively. He did not say "for the evil," nor, "for the viciousness,"
but "for the weakness and unprofitableness [thereof]," yea and in other places
also he shows the weakness; as when he says "In that it was weak through the
flesh." [Romans 8:3] [The law] itself then is not weak, but we.

Hebrews 7:19
"For the Law made nothing perfect." What is, "make nothing perfect"?
Made no man perfect, being disobeyed. And besides, even if it had been listened
to, it would not have made one perfect and virtuous. But as yet he does not say
this here, but that it had no strength: and with good reason. For written precepts
were there set down, Do this and Do not that, being enjoined only, and not
giving power within. But "the Hope" is not such.
What is "a disannulling"? A casting out. A "disannulling" is a disannulling
of things which are of force. So that he implied, that it [once] was of force, but
henceforward was of no account, since it accomplished nothing. Was the Law
then of no use? It was indeed of use; and of great use: but to make men perfect it
was of no use. For in this respect he says, "The Law made nothing perfect." All
were figures, all shadows; circumcision, sacrifice, sabbath. There fore they could
not reach through the soul, wherefore they pass away and gradually withdraw.
"But the bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw near unto God."