Think what a thing it is to have a fever and inflammation: go to him, extinguish
the fire, for by the grace of God you can, go, assuage the heat as it were with
water. "But," you will say, "how if he is only the more set up by my doing this
very thing?" This is nothing to you: you have done your part, let him take
account for himself: let not our conscience condemn us, that this thing happens
in consequence of any omission of what ought to have been done on our part. "In
so doing," says the Scripture, "you shall heap coals of fire on his head."
[Romans 12:20, cf. Hom. in l. xxii. §3] And yet, for all that this is the
consequence, it bids us go and be reconciled and do good offices— not that we
may heap coals of fire, but that (our enemy) knowing that future consequence,
may be assuaged by the present kindness, that he may tremble, that he may fear
our good offices rather than our hostilities, and our friendships rather than our ill
designs. For one does not so hurt his hater by showing his resentment as an
enemy, as by doing him good and showing kindness. For by his resentment, he
has hurt both himself and perhaps the other also in some little degree: but by
doing good offices, he has heaped coals of fire on his head. "Why then," you will
say, "for fear of thus heaping coals one ought not to do this (b) but to carry on
the enmity to greater lengths." By no means: it is not you that cause this, but he
with his brutish disposition. For if, when you are doing him good, and honoring
him, and offering to be reconciled, he persists in keeping up the enmity, it is he
has kindled the fire for himself, he has set his own head on fire; you are guiltless.
Do not want to be more merciful than God (b), or rather, if you wish it, you will
not be able, not even in the least degree. How should you? "As far as the heaven
is from the earth," Scripture says, "so far are My counsels from your counsels"
[Isaiah 45:8]: and again, "If you," He says, "being evil, know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more your heavenly Father" [Matthew 7:11]?
But in fact this talk is mere pretext and subterfuge. Let us not prevaricate with
God's commandments. "And how do we prevaricate," you will say? He has said,
"In so doing, you will heap coals of fire on his head:" and you say, I do not like
to do this. (a) But are you willing to heap coals after another fashion, that is

upon your own head? For in fact this is what resentment does: (c) since you shall
suffer evils without number. (e) You say, "I am afraid for my enemy, because he
has done me great injuries:" in reality is it this you say? But how came you to
have an enemy? But how came you to hate your enemy? You fear for him that
has injured you, but do you not fear yourself? Would that you had a care for
yourself! Do not act (the kindness) with such an aim as this: or rather do it,
though it be but with such an aim. But you do it not at all. I say not to you, "you
will heap coals of fire:" no, I say another and a greater thing: only do it. For Paul
says this only by way of summoning you (if only), in hope of the vengeance, to
put an end to the enmity. Because we are savage as wild beasts in disposition,
and would not otherwise endure to love our enemy, unless we expected some
revenge, he offers this as a cake, so to say, to a wild beast. For to the Apostles
(the Lord) says not this, but what says He? "That ye may be like to your Father
which is in heaven." [Matthew 5:45] And besides, it is not possible that the
benefactor and the benefited should remain in enmity. This is why Paul has put it
in this way. Why, affecting a high and generous principle in your words, why in
your deeds do you not even observe (common) moderation? (It sounds) well;
you do not feed him, for fear of thereby heaping upon him coals of fire: well
then, you spare him? Well then, you love him, you act with this object in view?
God knows, whether you have this object in so speaking, and are not palming
this talk upon us as a mere pretence and subterfuge. You have a care for your
enemy, you fear lest he be punished, then would you not have extinguished your
anger? For he that loves to that degree that he overlooks his own interest for the
sake of the other's advantage, that man has no enemy. (Then indeed) you might
say this. How long shall we trifle in matters that are not to be trifled with, and
that admit of no excuse? Wherefore I beseech you, let us cut off these pretexts;
let us not despise God's laws: that we may be enabled with well-pleasing to the
Lord to pass this life present, and attain unto the good things promised, through
the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the
Holy Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end.