THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.2.

bread and wine, wherewith men are commonly fed, are employed in
this sacrament for the use of spiritual eating.
Secondly, in relation to Christ's Passion, in which the blood was
separated from the body. And therefore in this sacrament, which is
the memorial of our Lord's Passion, the bread is received apart as
the sacrament of the body, and the wine as the sacrament of the
blood.
Thirdly, as to the effect, considered in each of the partakers. For, as
Ambrose (Mag. Sent. iv, D, xi) says on 1 Cor. 11:20, this sacrament
"avails for the defense of soul and body"; and therefore "Christ's
body is offered" under the species of bread "for the health of the
body, and the blood" under the species of wine "for the health of the
soul," according to Lev. 17:14: "The life of the animal is in the
blood."
Fourthly, as to the effect with regard to the whole Church, which is
made up of many believers, just "as bread is composed of many
grains, and wine flows from many grapes," as the gloss observes on
1 Cor. 10:17: "We being many are . . . one body," etc.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the flesh of slaughtered animals
represents the Passion more forcibly, nevertheless it is less suitable
for the common use of this sacrament, and for denoting the unity of
the Church.
Reply to Objection 2: Although wheat and wine are not produced in
every country, yet they can easily be conveyed to every land, that is,
as much as is needful for the use of this sacrament: at the same time
one is not to be consecrated when the other is lacking, because it
would not be a complete sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: Wine taken in small quantity cannot do the sick
much harm: yet if there be fear of harm, it is not necessary for all
who take Christ's body to partake also of His blood, as will be stated
later (Question 80, Article 12).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.2.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a determinate quantity of bread and wine

is required for the matter of this sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that a determinate quantity of bread and wine
is required for the matter of this sacrament. Because the effects of
grace are no less set in order than those of nature. But, "there is a
limit set by nature upon all existing things, and a reckoning of size
and development" (De Anima ii). Consequently, in this sacrament,
which is called "Eucharist," that is, "a good grace," a determinate
quantity of the bread and wine is required.
Objection 2: Further, Christ gave no power to the ministers of the
Church regarding matters which involve derision of the faith and of
His sacraments, according to 2 Cor. 10:8: "Of our power which the
Lord hath given us unto edification, and not for your destruction."
But it would lead to mockery of this sacrament if the priest were to
wish to consecrate all the bread which is sold in the market and all
the wine in the cellar. Therefore he cannot do this.
Objection 3: Further, if anyone be baptized in the sea, the entire seawater is not sanctified by the form of baptism, but only the water
wherewith the body of the baptized is cleansed. Therefore, neither in
this sacrament can a superfluous quantity of bread be consecrated.
On the contrary, Much is opposed to little, and great to small. But
there is no quantity, however small, of the bread and wine which
cannot be consecrated. Therefore, neither is there any quantity,
however great, which cannot be consecrated.
I answer that, Some have maintained that the priest could not
consecrate an immense quantity of bread and wine, for instance, all
the bread in the market or all the wine in a cask. But this does not
appear to be true, because in all things containing matter, the reason
for the determination of the matter is drawn from its disposition to an
end, just as the matter of a saw is iron, so as to adapt it for cutting.
But the end of this sacrament is the use of the faithful.
Consequently, the quantity of the matter of this sacrament must be
determined by comparison with the use of the faithful. But this
cannot be determined by comparison with the use of the faithful who
are actually present; otherwise the parish priest having few
parishioners could not consecrate many hosts. It remains, then, for