were comforted, I mean, the guests. "Why, I am so far," says He, "from loathing
sinners, that even for their sakes only am I come." Then, lest He should make
them more careless, He staid not at the word "sinners," but added, "unto
repentance." "For I am not come that they should continue sinners, but that they
should alter, and amend."
4. He then having stopped their mouths every way, as well from the
Scriptures as from the natural consequence of things; and they having nothing to
say, proved as they were obnoxious to the charges which they had brought
against Him, and adversaries of the law and the Old Testament; they leave Him,
and again transfer their accusation to the disciples.
And Luke indeed affirms that the Pharisees said it, but this evangelist, that
it was the disciples of John; but it is likely that both said it. That is, they being,
as might be expected, in utter perplexity, take the other sort with them; as they
did afterwards with the Herodians likewise. Since in truth John's disciples were
always disposed to be jealous of Him, and reasoned against Him: being then
only humbled, when first John abode in the prison. They came at least then, "and
told Jesus;" but afterwards they returned to their former envy.
Now what say they? "Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but your
disciples fast not?" [Matthew 9:14]
This is the disease, which Christ long before was eradicating, in the words,
"When you fast, anoint your head, and wash your face;" [Matthew 6:17]
foreknowing the evils that spring therefrom. But yet He does not rebuke even
these, nor say, "O you vainglorious and over-busy;" but He discourses to them
with all gentleness, saying, "The children of the bride-chamber cannot fast, as
long as the bridegroom is with them." Thus, when others were to be spoken for,
the publicans I mean, to soothe their wounded soul, He was more severe in His
reproof of their revilers; but when they were deriding Himself and His disciples,
He makes His reply with all gentleness.
Now their meaning is like this; "Granted," say they, "You do this as a
physician; why do Your disciples also leave fasting, and cleave to such tables?"

Then, to make the accusation heavier, they put themselves first, and then the
Pharisees; wishing by the comparison to aggravate the charge. For indeed "both
we," it is said, "and the Pharisees, fast oft." And in truth they did fast, the one
having learned it from John, the other from the law; even as also the Pharisee
said, "I fast twice in the week." [Luke 18:12]
What then says Jesus? "Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the
bridegroom is with them." Before, He called Himself a physician, but here a
bridegroom; by these names revealing His unspeakable mysteries. Yet of course
He might have told them, more sharply, "These things depend not on you, that
you should make such laws. For of what use is fasting, when the mind is full of
wickedness; when you blame others, when you condemn them, bearing about
beams in your eyes, and do all for display? Nay, before all this ye ought to have
cast out vainglory, to be proficients in all the other duties, in charity, meekness,
brotherly love." However, nothing of this kind does He say, but with all
gentleness, "The children of the bridechamber cannot fast, so long as the
bridegroom is with them;" recalling to their mind John's words, when he said,
"He that has the bride, is the bridegroom, but the friend of the bridegroom,
which stands and hears Him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom's
voice." [John 3:29]
Now His meaning is like this: The present time is of joy and gladness,
therefore do not bring in the things which are melancholy. For fasting is a
melancholy thing, not in its own nature, but to them that are yet in rather a feeble
state; for to those at least that are willing to practise self-command, the
observance is exceedingly pleasant and desirable. For as when the body is in
health, the spirits are high, so when the soul is well conditioned, the pleasure is
greater. But according to their previous impression He says this. So also Isaiah,
discoursing of it, calls it "an affliction of the soul;" and Moses too in like
manner.
Not however by this only does He stop their mouths, but by another topic
also, saying,