#### Sed contra

But on the contrary is what Damascene says, that division is the cause of number; but division
consists in diversity or otherness; therefore diversity, or otherness, is the principle of plurality.

Again, Isidore says that number is called, as it were, the master of numeration, that is, of
division; and so the conclusion is like the first.

Again, plurality is not constituted except by recession from unity; but there is no loss of unity
except by division, since a thing is said to be one in that it is undivided, as is evident from X
Metaph.; therefore division constitutes plurality, and thus the conclusion is as before.

Response. I answer that it must be said, as the Philosopher states in X Metaph., that a thing is
said to be plural (many) from the fact that it is divisible or has been divided. Wherefore anything
that is the cause of division ought to be regarded as a cause of plurality.

Now, the cause of division cannot be considered the same in posterior and composite beings as
in those that are first and simple. For in'posterior and composite things, the cause of division
which is, as it were, the formal cause of division by reason of which division comes about, is
diversity found in more simple and primary beings, as is made clear in the case of division
according to quantity. For one part of a line is divided from another part by the fact that they have
each a different place, which is, as it were, the formal difference of a thing of continuous quantity
having position. It is also evident in the division of substances. For man is different from an ass
because he has diverse constitutive differences: but the diversity by which posterior, composite
beings are divided according as prior and simpler beings are, presupposes plurality of these same
primary and more simple beings. For the reason why man and ass have diverse differences is
that ratipnality and irrationality are not one and the same thing, but differ in many ways. Nor can
it be said endlessly that the plurality of one thing is owing to another diversity in another prior
and simpler cause, because thus we would go on to infinity. Therefore it is necessary in some

other way to assign a cause of plurality and division in prior and more simple beings.

Now, there are some beings of this kind divided in themselves. Nevertheless it cannot be that
being is divided from being, inasmuch as it is being: for nothing is divided from being except
non-being. Likewise also from this-being, this-being is not divided, unless in this-being there is
included negation of the same being. Wherefore in primary termini of thought negative
propositions are immediately, as it were, negations, one of the other, in the intellect. For the first
thing caused constitutes plurality with its cause, which does not reach to it [so as to be identical
with it]. And according to this, certain philosophers hold that plurality is caused in a certain order
from one and the selfsame thing; so that from one thing proceeds, at first, one being, which with
its cause constitutes a plurality, and from this plurality, now two things can proceed, one
according to the thing itself, and the other according to its conjunction to a cause. But we are not
forced to say this, since one thing might be able to imitate the first in some way in which the
second would fail to agree with it; and this defect could be imitated in another; and so there can
be found many effects of the first cause in any number of which there is both negation of the
cause and negation of the effects in the same way, or according to distance separating one from
the other.