was speaking of the end, a thing disbelieved by many, He brought forward
Heaven and earth, indicating His unspeakable power, and showing with great
authority, that He is Lord of all, and by these things rendering His sayings
deserving of credit, even with those who are much given to doubt.
"But of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the angels of Heaven,
neither the Son, but the Father." By saying, not the angels, He stopped their
mouths, that they should not seek to learn what these angels know not; and by
saying, "neither the Son," forbids them not only to learn, but even to inquire. For
in proof that therefore He said this, see after His resurrection, when He saw they
had become over curious, how He stopped their mouths more decidedly. For
now indeed He has mentioned infallible signs, many and endless; but then He
says merely, "It is not for you to know times or seasons." And then that they
might not say, we are driven to perplexity, we are utterly scorned, we are not
held worthy so much as of this, He says, "which the Father has put in His own
power." And this, because He was exceedingly careful to honor them, and to
conceal nothing from them. Therefore He refers it to His Father, both to make
the thing awful, and to exclude that of which He had spoken from their inquiry.
Since if it be not this, but He is ignorant of it, when will He know it? Will it be
together with us? But who would say this? And the Father He knows clearly,
even as clearly as He knows the Son; and of the day is He ignorant? Moreover,
"the Spirit indeed searches even the deep things of God," [1 Corinthians 2:10]
and does not He know so much as the time of the judgment? But how He ought
to judge He knows, and of the secrets of each He has a full perception; and what
is far more common than that, of this could He be ignorant? And how, if "all
things were made by Him, and without Him was not even one thing made," was
He ignorant of the day? For He who made the worlds, it is quite plain that He
made the times also; and if the times, even that day. How then is He ignorant of
that which He made?
2. And ye indeed say that you know even His substance, but that the Son
not even the day, the Son, who is always in the bosom of the Father; and yet His

substance is much greater than the days, even infinitely greater. How then, while
assigning to yourselves the greater things, do you not allow even the less to the
Son, "in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge."
[Colossians 2:3] But neither do you know what God is in His substance, though
ten thousand times ye talk thus madly, neither is the Son ignorant of the day, but
is even in full certainty thereof.
For this cause, I say, when He had told all things, both the times and the
seasons, and had brought it to the very doors ("for it is near," He says, "even at
the doors"), He was silent as to the day. For if you seek after the day and hour,
you shall not hear them of me, says He; but if of times and preludes, without
hiding anything, I will tell you all exactly.
For that indeed I am not ignorant of it, I have shown by many things;
having mentioned intervals, and all the things that are to occur, and how short
from this present time until the day itself (for this did the parable of the fig tree
indicate), and I lead you to the very vestibule; and if I do not open unto you the
doors, this also I do for your good.
And that you may learn by another thing also, that the silence is not a mark
of ignorance on His part, see, together with what we have mentioned, how He
sets forth another sign also. "But as in the days of Noe they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that the flood came,
and took all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be." And these
things He spoke, showing that He should come on a sudden, and unexpectedly,
and when the more part were living luxuriously. For Paul too says this, writing
on this wise, "When they shall speak of peace and safety, then sudden
destruction comes upon them;" and to show how unexpected, He said, "as
travail upon a woman with child." [1 Thessalonians 5:3] How then does He say,
"after the tribulation of those days?" For if there be luxury then, and peace, and
safety, as Paul says, how does He say, "after the tribulation of those days?" If
there be luxury, how is there tribulation? Luxury for them that are in a state of
insensibility and peace. Therefore He said not, when there is peace, but "when