consumed by fire, nor be rendered unfruitful, and that where we have an accuser there we may
have also an Advocate, the Lord commending to the Holy Spirit His own man, who had fallen
among thieves, whom He Himself compassionated, and bound up his wounds, giving two royal
denaria; so that we, receiving by the Spirit the image and superscription of the Father and the Son,
might cause the denarium entrusted to us to be fruitful, counting out the increase [thereof] to the
Lord.
4. The Spirit, therefore, descending under the predestined dispensation, and the Son of God,
the Only-begotten, who is also the Word of the Father, coming in the fulness of time, having become
incarnate in man for the sake of man, and fulfilling all the conditions of human nature, our Lord
Jesus Christ being one and the same, as He Himself the Lord doth testify, as the apostles confess,
and as the prophets announce,—all the doctrines of these men who have invented putative Ogdoads
and Tetrads, and imagined subdivisions [of the Lord's person], have been proved falsehoods.
These men do, in fact, set the Spirit aside altogether; they understand that Christ was one and
Jesus another; and they teach that there was not one Christ, but many. And if they speak of them
as united, they do again separate them: for they show that one did indeed undergo sufferings, but
that the other remained impassible; that the one truly did ascend to the Pleroma, but the other
remained in the intermediate place; that the one does truly feast and revel in places invisible and
above all name, but that the other is seated with the Demiurge, emptying him of power. It will
therefore be incumbent upon thee, and all others who give their attention to this writing, and are
anxious about their own salvation, not readily to express acquiescence when they hear abroad the
speeches of these men: for, speaking things resembling the [doctrine of the] faithful, as I have
already observed, not only do they hold opinions which are different, but absolutely contrary, and
in all points full of blasphemies, by which they destroy those persons who, by reason of the
resemblance of the words, imbibe a poison which disagrees with their constitution, just as if one,
giving lime mixed with water for milk, should mislead by the similitude of the colour; as a man
superior to me has said, concerning all that in any way corrupt the things of God and adulterate the
truth, "Lime is wickedly mixed with the milk of God."

"Suum hominem," i.e., the human race.

### Chapter XVIII.—Continuation of the foregoing argument. Proofs from the writings of St.
Paul, and from the words of Our Lord, that Christ and Jesus cannot be considered as distinct
beings; neither can it be alleged that the Son of God became man merely in appearance, but
that He did so truly and actually.