man even boasts himself of them, it is excessive senselessness.
Do these words apply to them alone? And do those who are here present
escape the charge? And will no one have account to render of these things? Does
no one make a god of his belly, or glory in his shame? I wish, earnestly I wish,
that none of these charges lay against us, and that I did not know any one
involved in what I have said. But I fear lest the words have more reference to us
than to the men of those times. For when one consumes his whole life in
drinking and reveling, and expends some small trifle on the poor, while he
consumes the larger portion on his belly, will not these words with justice apply
to him? No words are more apt to call attention, or more cutting in reproof, than
these: "Whose god is the belly, whose glory is in their shame." And who are
these? They, he says, who mind earthly things. "Let us build houses." Where, I
ask? On the earth, they answer. Let us purchase farms; on the earth again: let us
obtain power; again on the earth: let us gain glory; again on the earth: let us
enrich ourselves; all these things are on the earth. These are they, whose god is
their belly; for if they have no spiritual thoughts, but have all their possessions
here, and mind these things, with reason have they their belly for their god, in
saying, "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die." And about your body, you
grieve, tell me, that it is of earth, though thus you are not at all injured. But your
soul you drag down to the earth, when you ought to render even your body
spiritual; for you may, if you will. You have received a belly, that you may feed,
not distend it, that you may have the mastery over it, not have it as mistress over
you: that it may minister to you for the nourishment of the other parts, not that
you may minister to it, not that you may exceed limits. The sea, when it passes
its bounds, does not work so many evils, as the belly does to our body, together
with our soul. The former overflows all the earth, the latter all the body. Put
moderation for a boundary to it, as God has put the sand for the sea. Then if its
waves arise, and rage furiously, rebuke it, with the power which is in you. See
how God has honored you, that you might imitate Him, and you will not; but
you see the belly overflowing, destroying and overwhelming your whole nature,

and darest not to restrain or moderate it.
"Whose God," he says, "is their belly." Let us see how Paul served God: let
us see how gluttons serve their belly. Do not they undergo ten thousand such
deaths? Do not they fear to disobey whatever it orders? Do not they minister
impossibilities to it? Are not they worse than slaves? "But our citizenship," says
he, "is in Heaven." Let us not then seek for ease here; there do we shine, where
also our citizenship is. "From whence also," says he, "we wait for a Saviour," the
Lord Jesus Christ: "who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it
may be conformed to the body of his glory." By little and little he has carried us
up. He says, "From Heaven" and "Our Saviour," showing, from the place and
from the Person, the dignity of the subject. "Who shall fashion anew the body of
our humiliation," says he. The body now suffers many things: it is bound with
chains, it is scourged, it suffers innumerable evils; but the body of Christ
suffered the same. This, then, he hinted at when he said, "That it may be
conformed to the body of his glory." Wherefore the body is the same, but puts on
incorruption. "Shall fashion anew." Wherefore the fashion is different; or
perchance he has spoken figuratively of the change.
He says, "the body of our humiliation," because it is now humbled, subject
to destruction, to pain, because it seems to be worthless, and to have nothing
beyond that of other animals. "That it may be conformed to the body of his
glory." What? Shall this our body be fashioned like Him, who sits at the right
hand of the Father, to Him who is worshipped by the Angels, before whom do
stand the incorporeal Powers, to Him who is above all rule and power, and
might? If then the whole world were to take up weeping and lament for those
who have fallen from this hope, could it worthily lament? Because, when a
promise is given us of our body being made like to Him, it still departs with the
demons. I care not for hell henceforth; whatever can be said, having fallen from
so great glory, now and henceforth consider hell to be nothing to this falling
away. What do you say, O Paul? To be made like Him? Yes, he answers; then,
lest you should disbelieve, he adds a reason; "According to the working whereby