FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

and nerves, we are to understand the forbidding of cruelty, lust, and
bravery in committing sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Men were wont to eat plants and other
products of the soil even before the deluge: but the eating of flesh
seems to have been introduced after the deluge; for it is written (Gn.
9:3): "Even as the green herbs have I delivered . . . all" flesh "to you."
The reason for this was that the eating of the products of the soil
savors rather of a simple life; whereas the eating of flesh savors of
delicate and over-careful living. For the soil gives birth to the herb of
its own accord; and such like products of the earth may be had in
great quantities with very little effort: whereas no small trouble is
necessary either to rear or to catch an animal. Consequently God
being wishful to bring His people back to a more simple way of
living, forbade them to eat many kinds of animals, but not those
things that are produced by the soil. Another reason may be that
animals were offered to idols, while the products of the soil were not.
The Reply to the Third Objection is clear from what has been said (ad
1).
Reply to Objection 4: Although the kid that is slain has no perception
of the manner in which its flesh is cooked, yet it would seem to savor
of heartlessness if the dam's milk, which was intended for the
nourishment of her offspring, were served up on the same dish. It
might also be said that the Gentiles in celebrating the feasts of their
idols prepared the flesh of kids in this manner, for the purpose of
sacrifice or banquet: hence (Ex. 23) after the solemnities to be
celebrated under the Law had been foretold, it is added: "Thou shalt
not boil a kid in the milk of its dam." The figurative reason for this
prohibition is this: the kid, signifying Christ, on account of "the
likeness of sinful flesh" (Rm. 8:3), was not to be seethed, i.e. slain,
by the Jews, "in the milk of its dam," i.e. during His infancy. Or else it
signifies that the kid, i.e. the sinner, should not be boiled in the milk
of its dam, i.e. should not be cajoled by flattery.
Reply to Objection 5: The Gentiles offered their gods the first-fruits,
which they held to bring them good luck: or they burnt them for the
purpose of secrecy. Consequently (the Israelites) were commanded
to look upon the fruits of the first three years as unclean: for in that
country nearly all the trees bear fruit in three years' time; those trees,
to wit, that are cultivated either from seed, or from a graft, or from a
cutting: but it seldom happens that the fruit-stones or seeds encased

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

in a pod are sown: since it would take a longer time for these to bear
fruit: and the Law considered what happened most frequently. The
fruits, however, of the fourth year, as being the firstlings of clean
fruits, were offered to God: and from the fifth year onward they were
eaten.
The figurative reason was that this foreshadowed the fact that after
the three states of the Law (the first lasting from Abraham to David,
the second, until they were carried away to Babylon, the third until
the time of Christ), the Fruit of the Law, i.e. Christ, was to be offered
to God. Or again, that we must mistrust our first efforts, on account
of their imperfection.
Reply to Objection 6: It is said of a man in Ecclus. 19:27, that "the
attire of the body . . . " shows "what he is." Hence the Lord wished
His people to be distinguished from other nations, not only by the
sign of the circumcision, which was in the flesh, but also by a certain
difference of attire. Wherefore they were forbidden to wear garments
woven of woolen and linen together, and for a woman to be clothed
with man's apparel, or vice versa, for two reasons. First, to avoid
idolatrous worship. Because the Gentiles, in their religious rites,
used garments of this sort, made of various materials. Moreover in
the worship of Mars, women put on men's armor; while, conversely,
in the worship of Venus men donned women's attire. The second
reason was to preserve them from lust: because the employment of
various materials in the making of garments signified inordinate
union of sexes, while the use of male attire by a woman, or vice
versa, has an incentive to evil desires, and offers an occasion of lust.
The figurative reason is that the prohibition of wearing a garment
woven of woolen and linen signified that it was forbidden to unite the
simplicity of innocence, denoted by wool, with the duplicity of
malice, betokened by linen. It also signifies that woman is forbidden
to presume to teach, or perform other duties of men: or that man
should not adopt the effeminate manners of a woman.
Reply to Objection 7: As Jerome says on Mt. 23:6, "the Lord
commanded them to make violet-colored fringes in the four corners
of their garments, so that the Israelites might be distinguished from
other nations." Hence, in this way, they professed to be Jews: and
consequently the very sight of this sign reminded them of their law.
When we read: "Thou shalt bind them on thy hand, and they shall be
ever before thy eyes, the Pharisees gave a false interpretation to