is God's, be he heathen or be he Jew; since even if he is an unbeliever, still he
needs help. For if indeed it had been committed to you to enquire and to judge,
you would have well said thus, but, as it is, his misfortune does not suffer you to
search out these things. For if even about men in good health it is not right to be
over-curious, nor to be a busybody in other men's matters, much less about those
that are in affliction.
9. But on another view what [shall we say]? Did you see him in prosperity,
in high esteem, that you should say that he is wicked and worthless? But if you
see him in affliction, do not say that he is wicked. For when a man is in high
credit, we fairly say these things; but when he is in calamity, and needs help, it is
not right to say that he is wicked. For this is cruelty, inhumanity, and arrogance.
Tell me what was ever more iniquitous than the Jews. But nevertheless while
God punished them, and that justly, yea, very justly, yet He approved of those
who had compassion on them, and those who rejoiced over them He punished.
[Amos 6:6] For "they were not grieved," it is said, "at the affliction of Joseph."
And again it is said "Redeem [Ransom] those who are ready to be slain:
spare not." [Proverbs 24:11] (He said not, enquire curiously, and learn who he is;
and yet, for the most part, they who are led away to execution are wicked,) for
this especially is charity. For he that does good to a friend, does it not altogether
for God's sake: but he that [does good] to one unknown, this man acts purely for
God's sake. "Do not spare" your money, even if it be necessary to spend all, yet
give.
But we, when we see persons in extreme distress, bewailing themselves,
suffering things more grievous than ten thousand deaths, and oftentimes unjustly,
we [I say] are sparing of our money, and unsparing of our brethren; we are
careful of lifeless things, but neglect the living soul. And yet Paul says, "in
meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, if perhaps God should give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and they may recover themselves
out of the snare of the devil who are taken captive by him, at His will." [2
Timothy 2:25-26] "If perhaps," he says; you see of how great long-suffering the

word is full.
Let us also imitate Him, and despair of no one. For the fishermen too, when
they have cast many times [suppose it], have not succeeded; but afterwards
having cast again, have gained all. So we also expect that you will all at once
show to us ripe fruit. For the husbandman too, after he has sown, waits one day
or two days, and is a long while in expectation: and all at once he sees the fruits
springing up on every side. This we expect will take place in your case also by
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
and also to the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ever and world
without end. Amen.