Hebrews 3:14
Then he adds [Hebrews 3:14], "For we have been made partakers of
Christ." What is this, "We have been made partakers of Christ"? We partake of
Him (he means); we were made One, we and He— since He is the Head and we
the body, "fellow-heirs and of the same body; we are one body, of His flesh and
of His bones." [Ephesians 3:6; Romans 12:5; Ephesians 5:30]
"If we hold fast the beginning of our confidence [or, the principle of our
subsistence ] steadfast unto the end." What is "the principle of our subsistence"?
The faith by which we stand, and have been brought into being and were made
to exist, as one may say.

Hebrews 3:16-4:2
5. Then he adds [Hebrews 3:15], "When it is said, Today if you hear His
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation." This is a transposition,
"when it is said, Today if you hear His voice, harden not your hearts." [It must
be read thus:]
[Hebrews 4:1-2] "Let us fear lest a promise being left us of entering into
His rest, any of you should seem to come short of it; for to us was the Gospel
preached as well as unto them when it is said, Today if you hear His voice" (for
"Today" is "at every time" ).
Then [he adds] "but the word of hearing did not profit them, as they were
not mixed by faith with them that heard." How did it not profit? Then wishing to
alarm them, he shows the same thing by what he says:
[Hebrews 3:16-19] "For some when they had heard did provoke, howbeit
not all that came out of Egypt by Moses: And with whom was He grieved forty
years? Was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcasses fell in the
wilderness? And to whom swear He that they should not enter into His rest, but
to them that believed not? So we see, that they could not enter in because of
unbelief." After again repeating the testimony, he adds also the question, which
makes the argument clear. For he said (he repeats), "Today if you hear His voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation." Of whom does he speak (he says)
[as] having been hardened? Of whom [as] not believing? Is it not of the Jews?
Now what he says is to this effect. They also heard, as we hear: but no
profit came to them. Do not suppose then that by "hearing" what is proclaimed
ye will be profited; seeing that they also heard, but derived no benefit because
they did not believe.
Caleb then and Joshua, because they agreed not with those who did not
believe, escaped the vengeance that was sent forth against them. And see how

admirably he said, not, They did not agree, but, "they were not mixed"— that is,
they stood apart, but not factiously when all the others had one and the same
mind. Here it seems to me that a faction too is hinted at.

Hebrews 4:3-5
6. [Hebrews 4:3] For "we who have believed," he says, "do enter into rest."
From what this is evident, he adds: "as He said, as I have sworn in My wrath, if
they shall enter into My rest: although the works were finished from the
foundation of the world." This indeed, is not evidence that we shall enter in, but
that they did not enter in. What then? Thus far he aims to show that as that rest
does not hinder the speaking of another rest, so neither does this [exclude] that
of Heaven. Up to this point then, he wishes to show that they [the Israelites] did
not attain to the rest. For because he means this, he says [Hebrews 4:4-5], "For
he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise, And God did rest the
seventh day from all His works. And in this place again, if they shall enter into
My rest." You see how that does not hinder this from being a rest?