The mysterious working of the risen Christ and his Spirit

275. In the second chapter, we reflected on that lack of deep spirituality which turns into
pessimism, fatalism, and mistrust. Some people do not commit themselves to mission because
they think that nothing will change and that it is useless to make the effort. They think: “Why
should I deny myself my comforts and pleasures if I won’t see any significant result?” This attitude
makes it impossible to be a missionary. It is only a malicious excuse for remaining caught up in
comfort, laziness, vague dissatisfaction and empty selfishness. It is a self-destructive attitude, for
“man cannot live without hope: life would become meaningless and unbearable”. If we think
that things are not going to change, we need to recall that Jesus Christ has triumphed over sin and
death and is now almighty. Jesus Christ truly lives. Put another way, “ if Christ has not been
raised, then our preaching is in vain” (1 Cor 15:14). The Gospel tells us that when the first
disciples went forth to preach, “the Lord worked with them and confirmed the message” (Mk
16:20). The same thing happens today. We are invited to discover this, to experience it. Christ,
risen and glorified, is the wellspring of our hope, and he will not deprive us of the help we need to
carry out the mission which he has entrusted to us.

276. Christ’s resurrection is not an event of the past; it contains a vital power which has permeated
this world. Where all seems to be dead, signs of the resurrection suddenly spring up. It is an
irresistible force. Often it seems that God does not exist: all around us we see persistent injustice,
evil, indifference and cruelty. But it is also true that in the midst of darkness something new always
springs to life and sooner or later produces fruit. On razed land life breaks through, stubbornly yet
invincibly. However dark things are, goodness always re-emerges and spreads. Each day in our
world beauty is born anew, it rises transformed through the storms of history. Values always tend
to reappear under new guises, and human beings have arisen time after time from situations that
seemed doomed. Such is the power of the resurrection, and all who evangelize are instruments of
that power.

277. At the same time, new difficulties are constantly surfacing: experiences of failure and the
human weaknesses which bring so much pain. We all know from experience that sometimes a
task does not bring the satisfaction we seek, results are few and changes are slow, and we are
tempted to grow weary. Yet lowering our arms momentarily out of weariness is not the same as
lowering them for good, overcome by chronic discontent and by a listlessness that parches the
soul. It also happens that our hearts can tire of the struggle because in the end we are caught up
in ourselves, in a careerism which thirsts for recognition, applause, rewards and status. In this
case we do not lower our arms, but we no longer grasp what we seek, the resurrection is not
there. In cases like these, the Gospel, the most beautiful message that this world can offer, is
buried under a pile of excuses.