Wherefore He Himself adds and says, that "He is his Lord." Or rather not even
this very thing does He say without support, but having taken the prophet with
Him, because of His being exceedingly distrusted by them, and evil reported of
among them. To which fact we ought to have special regard, and if anything be
said by Him that is lowly and submissive, not to be offended, for the cause is
this, with many other things also, that He talks with them in condescension.
Wherefore now also He delivers His doctrine in the manner of question and
answer; but He darkly intimates even in this way His dignity. For it was not as
much to be called Lord of the Jews, as of David.
But mark thou also, I pray you, how seasonable it is. For when He had said,
"There is one Lord," then He spoke of Himself that He is Lord, and showed it by
prophecy, no more by His works only. And He shows the Father Himself taking
vengeance upon them in His behalf, for He says, "Until I make Your enemies
Your footstool," and great unanimity even hereby on the part of Him that begot
Him towards Himself, and honor. And upon His reasonings with them He does
set this end high and great, and sufficient to close fast their mouths.
For they were silent from thenceforth, not willingly, but from their having
nothing to say; and they received so deadly a blow, as no longer to dare to
attempt the same things any more. For, "no one," it is said, "dared from that day
forth ask Him any more questions." [Matthew 22:46]
And this was no little advantage to the multitude. Therefore also unto them
does He henceforth direct His word, having removed the wolves, and having
repulsed their plots.
For those men gained nothing, taken captive by vainglory, and having fallen
upon this terrible passion. For terrible is this passion and many-headed, for some
set their heart upon power for the sake of this, some on wealth, some on strength.
But proceeding in order it goes on unto almsgiving also, and fasting, and
prayers, and teaching, and many are the heads of this monster.
But to be vainglorious indeed about those other things is nothing
wonderful; but to be so about fasting and prayer, this is strange and lamentable.

But that we may not again blame only, come and let us tell the means, by
which we shall avoid this. Against whom shall we prepare to contend first,
against those that are vainglorious of money, or those of dress, or those of places
of power, or those of sciences, or those of art, or those of their person, or those
of beauty, or those of ornaments, or those of cruelty, or those of humanity and
almsgiving, or those of wickedness, or those of death, or those after death? For
indeed, as I have said, this passion has many links, and goes on beyond our life.
For such a one, it is said, is dead, and that he may be held in admiration, has
charged that such and such things be done; and therefore such a one is poor, such
a one rich.
For the grievous thing is this, that even of opposite things is it made up.
Against whom then shall we stand, and let ourselves in array first? For one
and the same discourse suffices not against all. Will ye then that it be against
them that are vainglorious about almsgiving?
To me at least it seems well; for exceedingly do I love this thing, and am
pained at seeing it marred, and vainglory plotting against it, like a pandering
nurse against some royal damsel. For she feeds her in deed, but for disgrace and
mischief, prostituting her and commanding her to despise her father; but to deck
herself to please unholy and often despicable men; and invests her with such a
dress, as strangers wish, disgraceful, and dishonorable, not such as the father.
Come now, then, let us take our aim against these; and let there be an
almsgiving made in abundance for display to the multitude. Surely then, first
vainglory leads her out of her Father's chamber. And whereas her Father requires
not to appear so much as to the left hand, [Matthew 6:3] she displays her to the
slaves, and to the vulgar, that have not even known her.
Do you see a harlot, and pander, casting her into the love of foolish men,
that according as they require, so she may order herself? Do you desire to see
how it renders such a soul not a harlot only, but insane also?
Mark then her mind. For when she lets go heaven and runs after fugitives
and menial slaves, pursuing through streets and lanes them that hate her, the ugly