beginning of the preaching, poor men who lived by their daily earnings took
upon themselves enmities from rulers and the first men of the state, when there
was nowhere king or governor who was a believer; and submitted to
irreconcilable war, and not even so were unsettled.
Ver. 5. "Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God."
See how he gathers comfort for them. He had said, We give thanks to God,
he had said, We glory among men: these things indeed are honorable. But that
which he most seeks for, who is in suffering, is, deliverance from evils, and
vengeance upon those who are evil entreating them. For when the soul is weak,
it most seeks for these things, for the philosophic soul does not even seek these
things. Why then does he say, "a token of the righteous Judgment of God"? Here
he has glanced at the retribution on either side, both of those who do the ill, and
of those who suffer it, as if he had said, that the justice of God may be shown
when He crowns you indeed, but punishes them. At the same time also he
comforts them, showing that from their own labors and toils they are crowned,
and according to the proportion of righteousness. But he puts their part first. For
although a person even vehemently desires revenge, yet he first longs for reward.
For this reason he says,
"That ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you also
suffer."
This then does not come to pass from the circumstance that those who
injure them are more powerful than they, but because it is so that they must enter
into the kingdom. "For through many tribulations," he says, "we must enter into
the kingdom of God." [Acts 14:22]
Ver. 6, 7. "If so be that it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
affliction to them that afflict you, and to you that are afflicted rest with us at the
revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with the Angels of His power."
The phrase "If so be that" here is put for "because," which we also use, in
speaking of things that are quite evident and not to be denied; instead of saying,
"Because it is exceedingly righteous." "If so be," he says, "that it is a righteous

thing" with God to punish these, he will certainly punish them. As if he had said,
"If God cares for human affairs," "If God takes thought." And he does not put it
of his own opinion, but among things confessedly true; as if one said, "If God
hates the wicked," that he may compel them to grant that He does hate them. For
such sentences are above all indisputable, inasmuch as they also themselves
know that it is just. For if this is just with men, much more with God.
"To recompense," he says, "affliction to them that afflict you, and to you
that are afflicted rest." What then? Is the retribution equal? By no means, but see
by what follows how he shows that it is more severe, and the "rest" much
greater. Behold also another consolation, in that they have their partners in the
afflictions, as partners also in the retribution. He joins them in their crowns with
those who had performed infinitely more and greater works. Then he adds also
the period, and by the description leads their minds upward, all but opening
heaven already by his word, and setting it before their eyes; and he places
around Him the angelic host, both from the place and from the attendants
amplifying the image, so that they may be refreshed a little. "And to you that are
afflicted rest with us," he says, "at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven
with the Angels of his power."
Ver. 8. "In flaming fire rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and
to them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus."
If they that have not obeyed the Gospel suffer vengeance, what will not
they suffer who besides their disobedience also afflict you? And see his
intelligence; he says not here those who afflict you, but those "who obey not." So
that although not on your account, yet on His own it is necessary to punish them.
This then is said in order to full assurance, that it is altogether necessary for them
to be punished: but what was said before, was said that they also might be
honored, because they suffer these things on your account. The one causes them
to believe concerning the punishment; the other to be pleased, because for the
sake of what has been done to them they suffer these things.
All this was said to them, but it applies also to us. When therefore we are in