SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.181, C.5.

Reply to Objection 1: The contemplative life is directed to the love of
God, not of any degree, but to that which is perfect; whereas the
active life is necessary for any degree of the love of our neighbor.
Hence Gregory says (Hom. iii in Ezech.): "Without the contemplative
life it is possible to enter the heavenly kingdom, provided one omit
not the good actions we are able to do; but we cannot enter therein
without the active life, if we neglect to do the good we can do."
From this it is also evident that the active precedes the
contemplative life, as that which is common to all precedes, in the
order of generation, that which is proper to the perfect.
Reply to Objection 2: Progress from the active to the contemplative
life is according to the order of generation; whereas the return from
the contemplative life to the active is according to the order of
direction, in so far as the active life is directed by the contemplative.
Even thus habit is acquired by acts, and by the acquired habit one
acts yet more perfectly, as stated in Ethic. ii, 7.
Reply to Objection 3: He that is prone to yield to his passions on
account of his impulse to action is simply more apt for the active life
by reason of his restless spirit. Hence Gregory says (Moral. vi, 37)
that "there be some so restless that when they are free from labor
they labor all the more, because the more leisure they have for
thought, the worse interior turmoil they have to bear." Others, on the
contrary, have the mind naturally pure and restful, so that they are
apt for contemplation, and if they were to apply themselves wholly to
action, this would be detrimental to them. Wherefore Gregory says
(Moral. vi, 37) that "some are so slothful of mind that if they chance
to have any hard work to do they give way at the very outset." Yet, as
he adds further on, "often . . . love stimulates slothful souls to work,
and fear restrains souls that are disturbed in contemplation."
Consequently those who are more adapted to the active life can
prepare themselves for the contemplative by the practice of the
active life; while none the less, those who are more adapted to the
contemplative life can take upon themselves the works of the active
life, so as to become yet more apt for contemplation.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.181, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.182, C.1.

## QUESTION 183 — OF MAN'S VARIOUS DUTIES AND STATES IN

GENERAL

Prologue
We must next consider man's various states and duties. We shall
consider (1) man's duties and states in general; (2) the state of the
perfect in particular.
Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:
(1) What constitutes a state among men?
(2) Whether among men there should be various states and duties?
(3) Of the diversity of duties;
(4) Of the diversity of states.