slew Him when He had come, then He gave away the vineyard; thus here too,
when they were not willing to be present at the marriage, then He called others.
What then could be more ungrateful than they, when being bidden to a
marriage they rush away? For who would not choose to come to a marriage, and
that a King's marriage, and of a King making a marriage for a Son?
And wherefore is it called a marriage? One may say. That you might learn
God's tender care, His yearning towards us, the cheerfulness of the state of
things, that there is nothing sorrowful there, nor sad, but all things are full of
spiritual joy. Therefore also John calls Him a bridegroom, therefore Paul again
says, "For I have espoused you to one husband;" [2 Corinthians 11:2] and, "This
is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church."
[Ephesians 5:32]
Why then is not the bride said to be espoused to Him, but to the Son?
Because she that is espoused to the Son, is espoused to the Father. For it is
indifferent in Scripture that the one or the other should be said, because of the
identity of the substance.
Hereby He proclaimed the resurrection also. For since in what went before
He had spoken of the death, He shows that even after the death, then is the
marriage, then the bridegroom.
But not even so do these become better men nor more gentle, than which
what can be worse? For this again is a third accusation. The first that they killed
the prophets; then the son; afterwards that even when they had slain Him, and
were bidden unto the marriage of Him that was slain, by the very one that was
slain, they come not, but feign excuses, yokes of oxen, and pieces of ground, and
wives. And yet the excuses seem to be reasonable; but hence we learn, though
the things which hinder us be necessary, to set the things spiritual at a higher
price than all.
And He not suddenly, but a long time before. For, "Tell," He says, "them
that are bidden;" and again, "Call them that were bidden;" which circumstance
makes the charge against them heavier. And when were they bidden? By all the

prophets; by John again; for unto Christ he would pass all on, saying, "He must
increase, I must decrease;" [John 3:30] by the Son Himself again, "Come unto
me, all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you;" and again, "If
any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink." [John 7:37]
But not by words only, but also by actions did He bid them, after His
ascension by Peter, and those with him. "For He that wrought effectually in
Peter," it is said, "to the apostleship of the circumcision, was mighty also in me
towards the Gentiles."
For since on seeing the Son, they were angry and slew Him, He bids them
again by His servants. And unto what does He bid them? Unto labors, and toils,
and sweat? Nay but unto pleasure. For, "My oxen," He says, "and my fatlings are
killed." See how complete His banquet, how great His munificence.
And not even this shamed them, but the more long-suffering He showed, so
much the more were they hardened. For not for press of business, but from
"making light of it," they did not come.
"How then do some bring forward marriages, others yokes of oxen? These
things surely are of want of leisure."
By no means, for when spiritual things call us, there is no press of business
that has the power of necessity.
And to me they seem moreover to make use of these excuses, putting
forward these things as cloke for their negligence. And not this only is the
grievous thing, that they came not, but also that which is a far more violent and
furious act, to have even beaten them that came, and to have used them
despitefully, and to have slain them; this is worse than the former. For those
others came, demanding produce and fruits, and were slain; but these, bidding
them to the marriage of Him that had been slain by them, and these again are
murdered.
What is equal to this madness? This Paul also was laying to their charge,
when he said, "Who both killed the Lord, and their own prophets, and have
persecuted us."