249. God continues to work among the people of the Old Covenant and to bring forth treasures of
wisdom which flow from their encounter with his word. For this reason, the Church also is enriched
when she receives the values of Judaism. While it is true that certain Christian beliefs are
unacceptable to Judaism, and that the Church cannot refrain from proclaiming Jesus as Lord and
Messiah, there exists as well a rich complementarity which allows us to read the texts of the
Hebrew Scriptures together and to help one another to mine the riches of God’s word. We can
also share many ethical convictions and a common concern for justice and the development of
peoples.

Interreligious dialogue

250. An attitude of openness in truth and in love must characterize the dialogue with the followers
of non-Christian religions, in spite of various obstacles and difficulties, especially forms of
fundamentalism on both sides. Interreligious dialogue is a necessary condition for peace in the
world, and so it is a duty for Christians as well as other religious communities. This dialogue is in
first place a conversation about human existence or simply, as the bishops of India have put it, a
matter of “being open to them, sharing their joys and sorrows”. In this way we learn to accept
others and their different ways of living, thinking and speaking. We can then join one another in
taking up the duty of serving justice and peace, which should become a basic principle of all our
exchanges. A dialogue which seeks social peace and justice is in itself, beyond all merely practical
considerations, an ethical commitment which brings about a new social situation. Efforts made in
dealing with a specific theme can become a process in which, by mutual listening, both parts can
be purified and enriched. These efforts, therefore, can also express love for truth.

251. In this dialogue, ever friendly and sincere, attention must always be paid to the essential
bond between dialogue and proclamation, which leads the Church to maintain and intensify her
relationship with non-Christians. A facile syncretism would ultimately be a totalitarian gesture
on the part of those who would ignore greater values of which they are not the masters. True
openness involves remaining steadfast in one’s deepest convictions, clear and joyful in one’s own

identity, while at the same time being “open to understanding those of the other party” and
“knowing that dialogue can enrich each side”. What is not helpful is a diplomatic openness
which says “yes” to everything in order to avoid problems, for this would be a way of deceiving
others and denying them the good which we have been given to share generously with others.
Evangelization and interreligious dialogue, far from being opposed, mutually support and nourish
one another.