Reply to Objection 2: A body is not necessary to the intellectual soul
by reason of its intellectual operation considered as such; but on
account of the sensitive power, which requires an organ of equable
temperament. Therefore the intellectual soul had to be united to such
a body, and not to a simple element, or to a mixed body, in which fire
was in excess; because otherwise there could not be an equability of
temperament. And this body of an equable temperament has a
dignity of its own by reason of its being remote from contraries,
thereby resembling in a way a heavenly body.
Reply to Objection 3: The parts of an animal, for instance, the eye,
hand, flesh, and bones, and so forth, do not make the species; but
the whole does, and therefore, properly speaking, we cannot say that
these are of different species, but that they are of various
dispositions. This is suitable to the intellectual soul, which, although
it be one in its essence, yet on account of its perfection, is manifold
in power: and therefore, for its various operations it requires various
dispositions in the parts of the body to which it is united. For this
reason we observe that there is a greater variety of parts in perfect
than in imperfect animals; and in these a greater variety than in
plants.
Reply to Objection 4: The intellectual soul as comprehending
universals, has a power extending to the infinite; therefore it cannot
be limited by nature to certain fixed natural notions, or even to
certain fixed means whether of defence or of clothing, as is the case
with other animals, the souls of which are endowed with knowledge
and power in regard to fixed particular things. Instead of all these,
man has by nature his reason and his hands, which are "the organs
of organs" (De Anima iii), since by their means man can make for
himself instruments of an infinite variety, and for any number of
purposes.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the intellectual soul is united to the body

through the medium of accidental dispositions?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual soul is united to the
body through the medium of accidental dispositions. For every form
exists in its proper disposed matter. But dispositions to a form are
accidents. Therefore we must presuppose accidents to be in matter
before the substantial form; and therefore before the soul, since the
soul is a substantial form.
Objection 2: Further, various forms of one species require various
parts of matter. But various parts of matter are unintelligible without
division in measurable quantities. Therefore we must suppose
dimensions in matter before the substantial forms, which are many
belonging to one species.
Objection 3: Further, what is spiritual is connected with what is
corporeal by virtual contact. But the virtue of the soul is its power.
Therefore it seems that the soul is united to the body by means of a
power, which is an accident.
On the contrary, Accident is posterior to substance, both in the order
of time and in the order of reason, as the Philosopher says, Metaph.
vii (Did. vi, 1). Therefore it is unintelligible that any accidental form
exist in matter before the soul, which is the substantial form.
I answer that, If the soul were united to the body, merely as a motor,
there would be nothing to prevent the existence of certain
dispositions mediating between the soul and the body; on the
contrary, they would be necessary, for on the part of the soul would
be required the power to move the body; and on the part of the body,
a certain aptitude to be moved by the soul.
If, however, the intellectual soul is united to the body as the
substantial form, as we have already said above (Article 1), it is
impossible for any accidental disposition to come between the body
and the soul, or between any substantial form whatever and its
matter. The reason is because since matter is in potentiality to all
manner of acts in a certain order, what is absolutely first among the
acts must be understood as being first in matter. Now the first
among all acts is existence. Therefore, it is impossible for matter to