virtue? Yea, I entreat you, let no man neglect it. For great is the reward he
receives from God. And that you may understand, he who was entrusted with the
five talents is the teacher: and he with the one is the learner. If the learner should
say, I am a learner, I run no risk, and should hide the reason, which he received
of God, that common and simple [reason], and give no advice, should not speak
plainly, should not rebuke, should not admonish, if he is able, but should bury
[his talents] in the earth (for truly that heart is earth and ashes, which hides the
gift of God): if then he hides it either from indolence, or from wickedness, it will
be no defense to him to say, 'I had but one talent.' You had one talent. You ought
then to have brought one besides, and to have doubled the talent. If you had
brought one in addition, you would not have been blamed. For neither did He
say to him who brought the two, Wherefore have you not brought five? But He
accounted him of the same worth with him who brought the five. Why? Because
he gained as much as he had. And, because he had received fewer than the one
entrusted with the five, he was not on this account negligent, nor did he use the
smallness [of his trust, as an excuse] for idleness. And you ought not to have
looked to him who had the two; or rather, you ought to have looked to him, and
as he having two imitated him who had five, so ought thou to have emulated him
who had two. For if for him who has means and does not give, there is
punishment, how shall there not be the greatest punishment for him who is able
to exhort in any way, and does it not? In the former case the body is nourished,
in the latter the soul; there you prevent temporal death, here eternal.
6. But I have no [skill of] speech, you say. But there is no need of [skill of]
speech nor of eloquence. If you see a friend going into fornication, say to him,
You are going after an evil thing; are you not ashamed? Do you not blush? This
is wrong. 'Why, does he not know' (you say) 'that it is wrong?' Yes, but he is
dragged on by lust. They that are sick also know that it is bad to drink cold
water, nevertheless they need persons who shall hinder [them from it]. For he
who is suffering, will not easily be able to help himself in his sickness. There is
need therefore of you who art in health, for his cure. And if he be not persuaded

by your words, watch for him as he goes away and hold him fast; perhaps he will
be ashamed.
'And what advantage is it' (you say), 'when he does this for my sake, and
because he has been held back by me?' Do not be too minute in your
calculations. For a while, by whatever means, withdraw him from his evil
practice; let him be accustomed not to go off to that pit, whether through you, or
through any means whatever. When you have accustomed him not to go, then by
taking him after he has gained breath a little you will be able to teach him that he
ought to do this for God's sake, and not for man's. Do not wish to make all right
at once, since you cannot: but do it gently and by degrees.
If you see him going off to drinking, or to parties where there is nothing but
drunkenness, then also do the same; and again on the other hand intreat him, if
he observe that you have any failing, to help you and set you right. For in this
way, he will even of himself, bear reproof, when he sees both that you need
reproofs as well, and that you help him, not as one that had done everything
right, nor as a teacher, but as a friend and a brother. Say to him, I have done you
a service, in reminding you of things expedient: do thou also, whatever failing
you see me have, hold me back, set me right. If you see me irritable, if
avaricious, restrain me, bind me by exhortation.
This is friendship; thus "brother aided by brother becomes a fortified city."
[Proverbs 18:19] For not eating and drinking makes friendship: such friendship
even robbers have and murderers. But if we are friends, if we truly care for one
another, let us in these respects help one another. This leads us to a profitable
friendship: let us hinder those things which lead away to hell.
7. Therefore let not him that is reproved be indignant: for we are men and
we have failings; neither let him who reproves do it as exulting over him and
making a display, but privately, with gentleness. He that reproves has need of
greater gentleness, that thus he may persuade [them] to bear the cutting. Do you
not see surgeons, when they burn, when they cut, with how great gentleness they
apply their treatment? Much more ought those who reprove others to act thus.