Yet even this was no boon to them, unless they had been received. But what he
means is to this effect. If in anger with them He gave other men so great gifts,
when He is reconciled to them what will He not give? But as the resurrection of
the dead was not by the receiving of them, so neither now is our salvation
through them. But they were cast out owing to their own folly, but it is by faith
that we are saved, and by grace from above. But of all this nothing can be of
service to them, unless they show the requisite faith. Yet doing as he is wont, he
goes on to another encomium, which is not really one, but which only seems to
be, so imitating the wisest physicians, who give their patients as much
consolation as the nature of the sickness allows them. And what is it that he
says?
Ver. 16. "For if the first-fruits be holy, the lump also is holy; and if the root
be holy, so are the branches;"
So calling in this passage by the names of the first-fruit and root Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, the prophets, the patriarchs, all who were of note in the
Old Testament; and the branches, those from them who believed. Then since the
fact met him that many had disbelieved, observe how he undermines ([ὑ]
[ποτέμνεται], see p. 345) it again, and says,
Ver. 17. "And if some of the branches be broken off."
And yet above you said that the more part perished, and a few were saved
only. How came it then that speaking of those that perished, you have used a
"some," which is indicative of fewness? It is not, he replies, in opposition to
myself, but out of a desire to court and recover those that are distressed. Observe
how in the whole of the passage one finds him working at this object, the wish to
solace them. And if you deny it, many contradictions will follow. But let me beg
you to notice his wisdom, how while he seems to be speaking for them, and
devising a solace for them, he aims a secret blow at them, and shows that they
are devoid of all excuse, even from the "root," from the "first-fruit." For consider
the badness of the branches, which, when they have a sweet root, still do not
imitate it; and the faultiness of the lump, when it is not altered even by the first-

fruit. "And if some of the branches were broken off." However, the greater part
were broken off. Yet, as I said, he wishes to comfort them. And this is why it is
not in his own person, but in theirs, that he brings in the words used, and even in
this gives a secret stroke at them, and shows them to have fallen from being
Abraham's kinsmen. [Matthew 3:9] For what he was desirous of saying was, that
they had nothing in common with them. [John 8:39] For if the root be holy, and
these be not holy, then these are far away from the root. Then under the
appearance of solacing the Jews, he again by his accusation smites them of the
Gentiles. For after saying, "And if some of the branches were broken off," he
proceeds.
"And thou being a wild olive were grafted in."
For the less esteem the man of the Gentiles is of, the more the Jew is vexed
at seeing him enjoy his goods. And to the other, the disgrace of the little esteem
he was of, is nothing to the honor of the change. And consider his skilfulness. He
does not say, "thou were" planted "in," but "thou were grafted in," by this again
cutting the Jew to the heart, as showing that the Gentile man was standing in his
own tree, and himself lying on the ground. Wherefore he does not stop even
here, nor after he had spoken of grafting in does he leave off (and yet in this he
declared the whole matter), but still he dwells over the prosperous state of the
Gentile, and enlarges upon his fair fame in the words, "And with them partakest
of the root and fatness of the olive tree." And he seems indeed to have viewed
him in the light of an addition. But he shows that he was no whit the worse on
that account, but in possession of everything, that the branch which had come up
out of the root had. Lest then on hearing the words, "and thou were grafted in,"
you should suppose him to be lacking when compared with the natural branch,
see how he makes him equal to it by saying, that "with them you partake of the
root and fatness of the olive:" that is, hast been put into the same noble rank, the
same nature. Then in rebuking him, and saying,
Ver. 18. "Boast not against the branches." He seems indeed to be
comforting the Jew, but points out his vileness and extreme dishonor. And this is