SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.8.

First, on the part of the teacher, be he one or many, who makes
progress in knowledge as time goes on: and this is the kind of
progress that takes place in sciences devised by man. Secondly, on
the part of the learner; thus the master, who has perfect knowledge
of the art, does not deliver it all at once to his disciple from the very
outset, for he would not be able to take it all in, but he condescends
to the disciple's capacity and instructs him little by little. It is in this
way that men made progress in the knowledge of faith as time went
on. Hence the Apostle (Gal. 3:24) compares the state of the Old
Testament to childhood.
Reply to Objection 3: Two causes are requisite before actual
generation can take place, an agent, namely, and matter. In the order
of the active cause, the more perfect is naturally first; and in this way
nature makes a beginning with perfect things, since the imperfect is
not brought to perfection, except by something perfect already in
existence. On the other hand, in the order of the material cause, the
imperfect comes first, and in this way nature proceeds from the
imperfect to the perfect. Now in the manifestation of faith, God is the
active cause, having perfect knowledge from all eternity; while man
is likened to matter in receiving the influx of God's action. Hence,
among men, the knowledge of faith had to proceed from imperfection
to perfection; and, although some men have been after the manner
of active causes, through being doctors of faith, nevertheless the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to such men for the common
good, according to 1 Cor. 12:7; so that the knowledge of faith was
imparted to the Fathers who were instructors in the faith, so far as
was necessary at the time for the instruction of the people, either
openly or in figures.
Reply to Objection 4: The ultimate consummation of grace was
effected by Christ, wherefore the time of His coming is called the
"time of fulness" (Gal. 4:4). Hence those who were nearest to Christ,
wherefore before, like John the Baptist, or after, like the apostles,
had a fuller knowledge of the mysteries of faith; for even with regard
to man's state we find that the perfection of manhood comes in
youth, and that a man's state is all the more perfect, whether before
or after, the nearer it is to the time of his youth.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.8.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the articles of faith are suitably

formulated?
Objection 1: It would seem that the articles of faith are unsuitably
formulated. For those things, which can be known by demonstration,
do not belong to faith as to an object of belief for all, as stated above
(Article 5). Now it can be known by demonstration that there is one
God; hence the Philosopher proves this (Metaph. xii, text. 52) and
many other philosophers demonstrated the same truth. Therefore
that "there is one God" should not be set down as an article of faith.
Objection 2: Further, just as it is necessary to faith that we should
believe God to be almighty, so is it too that we should believe Him to
be "all-knowing" and "provident for all," about both of which points
some have erred. Therefore, among the articles of faith, mention
should have been made of God's wisdom and providence, even as of
His omnipotence.
Objection 3: Further, to know the Father is the same things as to
know the Son, according to Jn. 14:9: "He that seeth Me, seeth the
Father also." Therefore there ought to be but one article about the
Father and Son, and, for the same reason, about the Holy Ghost.
Objection 4: Further, the Person of the Father is no less than the
Person of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Now there are several
articles about the Person of the Holy Ghost, and likewise about the
Person of the Son. Therefore there should be several articles about
the Person of the Father.
Objection 5: Further, just as certain things are said by appropriation,
of the Person of the Father and of the Person of the Holy Ghost, so
too is something appropriated to the Person of the Son, in respect of
His Godhead. Now, among the articles of faith, a place is given to a
work appropriated to the Father, viz. the creation, and likewise, a
work appropriated to the Holy Ghost, viz. that "He spoke by the
prophets." Therefore the articles of faith should contain some work
appropriated to the Son in respect of His Godhead.
Objection 6: Further, the sacrament of the Eucharist presents a
special difficulty over and above the other articles. Therefore it
should have been mentioned in a special Article and consequently it