64. The process of secularization tends to reduce the faith and the Church to the sphere of the
private and personal. Furthermore, by completely rejecting the transcendent, it has produced a
growing deterioration of ethics, a weakening of the sense of personal and collective sin, and a
steady increase in relativism. These have led to a general sense of disorientation, especially in the
periods of adolescence and young adulthood which are so vulnerable to change. As the bishops of
the United States of America have rightly pointed out, while the Church insists on the existence of
objective moral norms which are valid for everyone, “there are those in our culture who portray this
teaching as unjust, that is, as opposed to basic human rights. Such claims usually follow from a
form of moral relativism that is joined, not without inconsistency, to a belief in the absolute rights of
individuals. In this view, the Church is perceived as promoting a particular prejudice and as
interfering with individual freedom”. We are living in an information-driven society which
bombards us indiscriminately with data – all treated as being of equal importance – and which
leads to remarkable superficiality in the area of moral discernment. In response, we need to
provide an education which teaches critical thinking and encourages the development of mature
moral values.

65. Despite the tide of secularism which has swept our societies, in many countries – even those
where Christians are a minority – the Catholic Church is considered a credible institution by public
opinion, and trusted for her solidarity and concern for those in greatest need. Again and again, the

Church has acted as a mediator in finding solutions to problems affecting peace, social harmony,
the land, the defence of life, human and civil rights, and so forth. And how much good has been
done by Catholic schools and universities around the world! This is a good thing. Yet, we find it
difficult to make people see that when we raise other questions less palatable to public opinion, we
are doing so out of fidelity to precisely the same convictions about human dignity and the common
good.

66. The family is experiencing a profound cultural crisis, as are all communities and social bonds.
In the case of the family, the weakening of these bonds is particularly serious because the family
is the fundamental cell of society, where we learn to live with others despite our differences and to
belong to one another; it is also the place where parents pass on the faith to their children.
Marriage now tends to be viewed as a form of mere emotional satisfaction that can be constructed
in any way or modified at will. But the indispensible contribution of marriage to society transcends
the feelings and momentary needs of the couple. As the French bishops have taught, it is not born
“of loving sentiment, ephemeral by definition, but from the depth of the obligation assumed by the
spouses who accept to enter a total communion of life”.