quantity as suffices for the increase required. And this matter, they
state, belongs secondarily to the true human nature: because it is
not required for the primary existence of the individual, but for the
quantity due to him. And if anything further is produced from the
food, this does not belong to true human nature, properly speaking.
However, this also is inadmissible. First, because this opinion
judges of living bodies as of inanimate bodies; in which, although
there be a power of generating their like in species, there is not the
power of generating their like in the individual; which power in living
bodies is the nutritive power. Nothing, therefore, would be added to
living bodies by their nutritive power, if their food were not changed
into their true nature. Secondly, because the active seminal power is
a certain impression derived from the soul of the begetter, as stated
above (Question 118, Article 1). Hence it cannot have a greater power
in acting, than the soul from which it is derived. If, therefore, by the
seminal power a certain matter truly assumes the form of human
nature, much more can the soul, by the nutritive power, imprint the
true form of human nature on the food which is assimilated. Thirdly,
because food is needed not only for growth, else at the term of
growth, food would be needful no longer; but also to renew that
which is lost by the action of natural heat. But there would be no
renewal, unless what is formed from the food, took the place of what
is lost. Wherefore just as that which was there previously belonged
to true human nature, so also does that which is formed from the
food.
Therefore, according to others, it must be said that the food is really
changed into the true human nature by reason of its assuming the
specific form of flesh, bones and such like parts. This is what the
Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 4): "Food nourishes inasmuch as it is
potentially flesh."
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord does not say that the "whole" of what
enters into the mouth, but "all"---because something from every kind
of food is cast out into the privy. It may also be said that whatever is
generated from food, can be dissolved by natural heat, and be cast
aside through the pores, as Jerome expounds the passage.
Reply to Objection 2: By flesh belonging to the species, some have
understood that which first receives the human species, which is
derived from the begetter: this, they say, lasts as long as the
individual does. By flesh belonging to the matter these understand
what is generated from food: and this, they say, does not always

remain, but as it comes so it goes. But this is contrary to the mind of
Aristotle. For he says there, that "just as in things which have their
species in matter"---for instance, wood or stone---"so in flesh, there
is something belonging to the species, and something belonging to
matter." Now it is clear that this distinction has no place in inanimate
things, which are not generated seminally, or nourished. Again,
since what is generated from food is united to, by mixing with, the
body so nourished, just as water is mixed with wine, as the
Philosopher says there by way of example: that which is added, and
that to which it is added, cannot be different natures, since they are
already made one by being mixed together. Therefore there is no
reason for saying that one is destroyed by natural heat, while the
other remains.
It must therefore be said that this distinction of the Philosopher is
not of different kinds of flesh, but of the same flesh considered from
different points of view. For if we consider the flesh according to the
species, that is, according to that which is formed therein, thus it
remains always: because the nature of flesh always remains together
with its natural disposition. But if we consider flesh according to
matter, then it does not remain, but is gradually destroyed and
renewed: thus in the fire of a furnace, the form of fire remains, but
the matter is gradually consumed, and other matter is substituted in
its place.
Reply to Objection 3: The "radical humor" is said to comprise
whatever the virtue of the species is founded on. If this be taken
away it cannot be renewed; as when a man's hand or foot is
amputated. But the "nutritive humor" is that which has not yet
received perfectly the specific nature, but is on the way thereto; such
is the blood, and the like. Wherefore if such be taken away, the virtue
of the species remains in its root, which is not destroyed.
Reply to Objection 4: Every virtue of a passible body is weakened by
continuous action, because such agents are also patient. Therefore
the transforming virtue is strong at first so as to be able to transform
not only enough for the renewal of what is lost, but also for growth.
Later on it can only transform enough for the renewal of what is lost,
and then growth ceases. At last it cannot even do this; and then
begins decline. In fine, when this virtue fails altogether, the animal
dies. Thus the virtue of wine that transforms the water added to it, is
weakened by further additions of water, so as to become at length
watery, as the Philosopher says by way of example (De Gener. i, 5).