strength. To bear poverty through life is the part of strength. It is the part of
strength to wrestle with hunger and thirst. Where none of these things are, but
where you may enjoy your own, as becomes a Christian, without envying others,
what violence is there?
From this source springs envy; nay, rather all evils spring from no other
source than this, that we cleave to things present. For did you hold money and
the glory of this world to be nought, you would not cast an evil eye on its
possessors. But since you gape at these things, and idolize them, and are flattered
by them, for this reason envy troubles you, and vain-glory; it all springs from
idolizing the things of the present life. Are you envious because another man is
rich? Nay, such an one is an object for pity and for tears. But you laugh and
answer straight, I am the object for tears, not he! Thou also art an object for
tears, not because you are poor, but because you think yourself wretched. For we
weep for those who have nothing the matter, and are discontented, not because
they have anything the matter, but because, without having, they think they have.
For example: if any one, cured of a fever, still is restless and rolls about, lying in
health on his bed, is he not more to be wept for than those in fever, not that he
has a fever, for he has none, but because having no sickness he still thinks he
has? And you are an object for tears just because you think yourself wretched,
not for your poverty. For your poverty you are to be thought happy.
Why do you envy the rich man? Is it because he has subjected himself to
many cares? To a harder slavery? Because he is bound like a dog, with ten
thousand chains— namely, his riches? Evening overtakes him, night overtakes
him, but the season of rest is to him a time of trouble of anguish, of pain, of
anxiety. There is a noise: he straightway jumps up. Has his neighbor been
plundered? He who has lost nothing cares more for it than the loser. For that man
has lost once, but having endured the pain he lays aside his care; but the other
has it always with him. Night comes on, the haven of our ills, the solace of our
woes, the medicine of our wounds. For they who are weighed down by excess of
grief, often give no ear to their friends, to their relations, to their intimates—

ofttimes not even to a father when he would give comfort, but take their very
words amiss; but when sleep bids them rest, none has the power to look him in
the face. For worse than any burning does the bitterness of grief afflict our souls.
And as the body, when parched and worn down by struggling against the
violence of the sunbeams, is brought to a caravansary with many fountains, and
the soothing of a gentle breeze, so does night hand over our soul to sleep. Yea,
rather, I should say, not night nor sleep does this, but God, who knows our toilworn race, has wrought this, while we have no compassion on ourselves, but, as
though at enmity with ourselves, have devised a tyranny more powerful than
natural want of rest— the sleeplessness which comes of wealth. For it is said,
"The anxieties of wealth drive away sleep." [Sirach 31:1] See how great is the
care of God. But He has not committed rest to our will, nor our need of sleep to
choice, but has bound it up in the necessities of nature, that good may be done to
us even against our wills. For to sleep is of nature. But we, as mighty haters of
ourselves, like enemies and persecutors of others, have devised a tyranny greater
than this necessity of nature that, namely, which comes of money. Has day
dawned? Then such an one is in dread of the informers. Hath night overtaken
him? He trembles at robbers. Is death at hand? The thought that he must leave
his goods to others preys upon him worse than death. Hath he a son? His desires
are increased; and then he fancies himself poor. Has he none? His pains are
greater. Deemest thou him blessed who is unable to receive pleasure from any
quarter? Can you envy him thus tempest-tossed, while you yourself are placed in
the quiet haven of poverty? Of a truth this is the imperfection of human nature;
that it bears not its good nobly, but casts insults on its very prosperity.
And all this on earth; but when we depart there, listen what the rich man,
who was lord of innumerable goods, as you say (since for my part I call not
these things good, but indifferent), listen to what this lord of innumerable goods
says, and of what he stands in need: "Father Abraham," he exclaims, "send
Lazarus, that with the tip of his finger he may drop water on my tongue, for I am
scorched in this flame." For even if that rich man had endured none of the things