Further, Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort. iii; De Civ. Dei i): "The
funereal equipment, the disposition of the grace, the solemnity of the
obsequies are a comfort to the living rather than a help to the dead."
Further, Our Lord said (Lk. 12:4): "Be not afraid of them who kill the
body, and after that have no more that they can do." Now after death
the bodies of the saints can be hindered from being buried, as we
read of having been done to certain martyrs at Lyons in Gaul
(Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. v, 1). Therefore the dead take no harm if their
bodies remain unburied: and consequently the burial service does
not profit them.
I answer that, We have recourse to burial for the sake of both the
living and the dead. For the sake of the living, lest their eyes be
revolted by the disfigurement of the corpse, and their bodies be
infected by the stench, and this as regards the body. But it profits
the living also spiritually inasmuch as our belief in the resurrection
is confirmed thereby. It profits the dead in so far as one bears the
dead in mind and prays for them through looking on their burial
place, wherefore a "monument" takes its name from remembrance,
for a monument is something that recalls the mind [monens
mentem], as Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei i; De Cura pro Mort. iv).
It was, however, a pagan error that burial was profitable to the dead
by procuring rest for his soul: for they believed that the soul could
not be at rest until the body was buried, which is altogether
ridiculous and absurd.
That, moreover, burial in a sacred place profits the dead, does not
result from the action done, but rather from the action itself of the
doer: when, to wit, the dead person himself, or another, arranges for
his body to be buried in a sacred place, and commends him to the
patronage of some saint, by whose prayers we must believe that he
is assisted, as well as to the suffrages of those who serve the holy
place, and pray more frequently and more specially for those who
are buried in their midst. But such things as are done for the display
of the obsequies are profitable to the living, as being a consolation
to them; and yet they can also profit the dead, not directly but
indirectly, in so far as men are aroused to pity thereby and
consequently to pray, or in so far as the outlay on the burial brings
either assistance to the poor or adornment to the church: for it is in
this sense that the burial of the dead is reckoned among the works
of mercy.

Reply to Objection 1: By bringing oil and candles to the tombs of the
dead we profit them indirectly, either as offering them to the Church
and as giving them to the poor, or as doing this in reverence of God.
Hence, after the words quoted we read: "For oil and candles are a
holocaust."
Reply to Objection 2: The fathers of old arranged for the burial of
their bodies, so as to show that "the bodies of the dead" are the
object of Divine providence, not that there is any feeling in a dead
body, but in order to confirm the belief in the resurrection, as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 13). Hence, also, they wished to be
buried in the land of promise, where they believed Christ's birth and
death would take place, Whose resurrection is the cause of our
rising again.
Reply to Objection 3: Since flesh is a part of man's nature, man has a
natural affection for his flesh, according to Eph. 5:29, "No man ever
hated his own flesh." Hence in accordance with this natural affection
a man has during life a certain solicitude for what will become of his
body after death: and he would grieve if he had a presentiment that
something untoward would happen to his body. Consequently those
who love a man, through being conformed to the one they love in his
affection for himself, treat his body with loving care. For as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 13): "If a father's garment and ring, and
whatever such like is the more dear to those whom they leave behind
the greater their affection is towards their parents, in no wise are the
bodies themselves to be spurned which truly we wear in more
familiar and close conjunction than anything else we put on."
Reply to Objection 4: As Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort. iv), the
devotion of the faithful is not fruitless when they arrange for their
friends to be buried in holy places, since by so doing they commend
their dead to the suffrages of the saints, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 5: The wicked man dead takes no harm by being
buried in a holy place, except in so far as he rendered such a burial
place unfitting for him by reason of human glory.