FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.2.

little interest in the people they are set over, and consequently to
have no care for their welfare: secondly, He prescribed how the king
after his appointment should behave, in regard to himself; namely,
that he should not accumulate chariots and horses, nor wives, nor
immense wealth: because through craving for such things princes
become tyrants and forsake justice. He also appointed the manner in
which they were to conduct themselves towards God: namely, that
they should continually read and ponder on God's Law, and should
ever fear and obey God. Moreover, He decided how they should
behave towards their subjects: namely, that they should not proudly
despise them, or ill-treat them, and that they should not depart from
the paths of justice.
Reply to Objection 3: The division of the kingdom, and a number of
kings, was rather a punishment inflicted on that people for their
many dissensions, specially against the just rule of David, than a
benefit conferred on them for their profit. Hence it is written (Osee
13:11): "I will give thee a king in My wrath"; and (Osee 8:4): "They
have reigned, but not by Me: they have been princes, and I knew
not."
Reply to Objection 4: The priestly office was bequeathed by
succession from father to son: and this, in order that it might be held
in greater respect, if not any man from the people could become a
priest: since honor was given to them out of reverence for the divine
worship. Hence it was necessary to put aside certain things for them
both as to tithes and as to first-fruits, and, again, as to oblations and
sacrifices, that they might be afforded a means of livelihood. On the
other hand, the rulers, as stated above, were chosen from the whole
people; wherefore they had their own possessions, from which to
derive a living: and so much the more, since the Lord forbade even a
king to have superabundant wealth to make too much show of
magnificence: both because he could scarcely avoid the excesses of
pride and tyranny, arising from such things, and because, if the
rulers were not very rich, and if their office involved much work and
anxiety, it would not tempt the ambition of the common people; and
would not become an occasion of sedition.
Reply to Objection 5: That right was not given to the king by Divine
institution: rather was it foretold that kings would usurp that right, by
framing unjust laws, and by degenerating into tyrants who preyed on
their subjects. This is clear from the context that follows: "And you
shall be his slaves": which is significative of tyranny, since a tyrant

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.2.

rules is subjects as though they were his slaves. Hence Samuel
spoke these words to deter them from asking for a king; since the
narrative continues: "But the people would not hear the voice of
Samuel." It may happen, however, that even a good king, without
being a tyrant, may take away the sons, and make them tribunes and
centurions; and may take many things from his subjects in order to
secure the common weal.