Ver. 19, 20. "For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would
not that I do. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it but sin that
dwells in me."
Do you see, how he acquits the essence of the soul, as well as the essence of
the flesh, from accusation, and removes it entirely to sinful actions? For if the
soul wills not the evil, it is cleared: and if he does not work it himself, the body
too is set free, and the whole may be charged upon the evil moral choice. Now
the essence of the soul and body and of that choice are not the same, for the two
first are God's works, and the other is a motion from ourselves towards whatever
we please to direct it. For willing is indeed natural ([ἕ] [μφυτον]), and is from
God: but willing on this wise is our own, and from our own mind.
Ver. 21. "I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me."
What he says is not very clear. What then is it that is said? I praise the law,
he says, in my conscience, and I find it pleads on my side so far as I am desirous
of doing what is right, and that it invigorates this wish. For as I feel a pleasure in
it, so does it yield praise to my decision. Do you see how he shows, that the
knowledge of what is good and what is not such is an original and fundamental
part of our nature, and that the Law of Moses praises it, and gets praise from it?
For above he did not say so much as I get taught by the Law, but "I consent to
the Law;" nor further on that I get instructed by it, but "I delight in" it. Now what
is "I delight?" It is, I agree with it as right, as it does with me when wishing to
do what is good. And so the willing what is good and the not willing what is evil
was made a fundamental part of us from the first. But the Law, when it came,
was made at once a stronger accuser in what was bad, and a greater praiser in
what was good. Do you observe that in every place he bears witness to its having
a kind of intensitiveness and additional advantage, yet nothing further? For
though it praises and I delight in it, and wish what is good the "evil is" still
"present with me," and the agency of it has not been abolished. And thus the
Law, with a man who determines upon doing anything good, only acts so far as

auxiliary to him, as that it has the same wish as himself. Then since he had stated
it indistinctly, as he goes on he gives a yet more distinct interpretation, by
showing how the evil is present, how too the Law is a law to such a person only
who has a mind to do what is good.
Ver. 22. "For I delight," he says, "in the law of God after the inward man."
He means, for I knew even before this what was good, but when I find it set
down in writing, I praise it.
Ver. 23. "But I see another law warring against the law of my mind."
Here again he calls sin a law warring against the other, not in respect of
good order, but from the strict obedience yielded to it by those who comply with
it. As then it gives the name of master [κύριον] [Matthew 6:24; Luke 16:13] to
Mammon, and of god [Philippians 3:19] to the belly, not because of their
intrinsically deserving it, but because of the extreme obsequiousness of their
subjects; so here he calls sin a law, owing to those who are so obsequious to it,
and are afraid to leave it, just as those who have received the Law dread leaving
the Law. This then, he means, is opposed to the law of nature; for this is what is
meant by "the law of my mind." And he next represents an array and battle, and
refers the whole struggle to the law of nature. For that of Moses was
subsequently added over and above: yet still both the one and the other, the one
as teaching, the other as praising what was right, wrought no great effects in this
battle; so great was the thraldom of sin, overcoming and getting the upper hand
as it did. And this Paul setting forth, and showing the decided ([κατὰ κράτος])
victory it had, says, "I see another law warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity." He does not use the word conquering only, but
"bringing me into captivity to the law of sin." He does not say the bent of the
flesh, or the nature of the flesh, but "the law of sin." That is, the thrall, the power.
In what sense then does he say, "Which is in my members?" Now what is this?
Surely it does not make the members to be sin, but makes them as distinct from
sin as possible. For that which is in a thing is diverse from that wherein it is. As
then the commandment also is not evil, because by it sin took occasion, so