human race somehow or other is fond of contention, and leans to contrary
feeling. Let us therefore despise glory, for thus we shall be enabled to become
lowly, or rather to become exalted. Exalt not yourself, that you may be exalted
by another; he that is exalted by himself is not exalted by others, he who is
humbled by himself is not humbled by others. Haughtiness is a great evil, it is
better to be a fool than haughty; for in the one case, the folly is only a perversion
of intellect, but in the other case it is still worse, and is folly joined with
madness: the fool is an evil to himself; but the haughty man is a plague to others
too. This misery comes of senselessness. One cannot be haughty-minded without
being a fool; and he that is brimfull of folly is haughty.
Listen to the Wise Man, who says, "I saw a man wise in his own conceit;
there is more hope of a fool than of him." [Proverbs 26:12] Do you see how it
was not without reason I said that the evil of which I am speaking is worse than
that of folly, for it is written, "There is more hope of a fool than of him"?
Wherefore, Paul too said, "Be not wise in your own conceits." [Romans 12:16]
Tell me what description of bodies do we say are in good health, those which are
much inflated, and are inwardly full of much air and water, or those which are
kept low, and have their surface such as marks restraint? It is manifest that we
should choose the latter. So, too with the soul, that which is puffed up has a
worse disease than dropsy, while that which is under restraint is freed from all
evil. How great then are the good things which lowliness of mind brings to us!
What would you have? Forbearance? Freedom from anger? love to our fellowmen? soberness? attentiveness? All these good things spring from lowlymindedness, and their contraries from haughtiness: the haughty man must needs
be also insolent, a brawler, wrathful, bitter, sullen, a beast rather than a man. Are
you strong, and proud thereat? You should rather be humble on this account.
Why are you proud for a thing of nought? For even a lion is bolder than thou, a
wild boar is stronger, and you are not even as a fly in comparison with them.
Robbers too, and violaters of tombs, and gladiators, and even your own slaves,
and those perchance who are more stupid still, are stronger than thou. Is this then

a fit subject for praise? Are you proud of such a matter? Bury yourself for
shame!
But are you handsome and beautiful? This is the boast of crows! You are
not fairer than the peacock, as regards either its color or its plumage; the bird
beats you in plumage, it far surpasses you in its feathers and in its color. The
swan too is passing fair, and many other birds, with whom if you are compared
you will see that you are nought. Often too worthless boys, and unmarried girls,
and harlots, and effeminate men have had this boast; is this then a cause for
haughtiness? But are you rich? Whence so? What have you? Gold, silver,
precious stones! This is the boast of robbers also, of man-slayers, of those who
work in the mines. That which is the labor of criminals becomes to you a boast!
But do you adorn and deck yourself out? Well, we may see horses also decked
out, and among the Persians camels too, and as for men, all those who are about
the stage. Are you not ashamed to boast yourself of these things, if unreasoning
animals, and slaves, and man-slayers, and effeminate, and robbers, and violaters
of tombs, share with you? Do you build splendid palaces? And what of this?
Many jackdaws dwell in more splendid houses, and have more noble retreats. Do
you not see how many, who were mad after money, have built houses in fields
and desert places, that are retreats for jackdaws? But are you proud on account
of your voice. You can by no means sing with clearer and sweeter tones than the
swan or the nightingale. Is it for your varied knowledge of arts? But what is
wiser than the bee in this; what embroiderer, what painter, what geometrician,
can imitate her works? Is it for the fineness of your apparel? But here the spiders
beat you. Is it for the swiftness of your feet? Again the first prize is with
unreasoning animals, the hare, and the gazelle, and all the beasts which are not
wanting in swiftness of foot. Have you traveled much? Not more than the birds;
their transit is more easily made, they have no need of provisions for the way,
nor beasts of burden, for their wings are all-sufficient for them; this is their
vessel, this their beast of burden, this their car, this is even their wind, in short,
all that a man can name. But are you clear sighted? Not as the gazelle; not as the