SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.3.

chiefly to his own spiritual welfare, whereas that he look to the
spiritual welfare of others becomes a man according to the
appointment of another having authority, as stated above (Article 1,
ad 3). Hence just as it is a mark of an inordinate will that a man of his
own choice incline to be appointed to the government of others, so
too it indicates an inordinate will if a man definitively refuse the
aforesaid office of government in direct opposition to the
appointment of his superior: and this for two reasons.
First, because this is contrary to the love of our neighbor, for whose
good a man should offer himself according as place and time
demand: hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 19) that "the
demands of charity undertake an honest labor." Secondly, because
this is contrary to humility, whereby a man submits to his superior's
commands: hence Gregory says (Pastor. i, 6): "In God's sight
humility is genuine when it does not obstinately refuse to submit to
what is usefully prescribed."
Reply to Objection 1: Although simply and absolutely speaking the
contemplative life is more excellent than the active, and the love of
God better than the love of our neighbor, yet, on the other hand, the
good of the many should be preferred to the good of the individual.
Wherefore Augustine says in the passage quoted above: "Nor prefer
your own ease to the needs of the Church," and all the more since it
belongs to the love of God that a man undertake the pastoral care of
Christ's sheep. Hence Augustine, commenting on Jn. 21:17, "Feed
My sheep," says (Tract. cxxiii in Joan.): "Be it the task of love to feed
the Lord's flock, even as it was the mark of fear to deny the
Shepherd."
Moreover prelates are not transferred to the active life, so as to
forsake the contemplative; wherefore Augustine says (De Civ. Dei
xix, 19) that "if the burden of the pastoral office be imposed, we must
not abandon the delights of truth," which are derived from
contemplation.
Reply to Objection 2: No one is bound to obey his superior by doing
what is unlawful, as appears from what was said above concerning
obedience (Question 104, Article 5). Accordingly it may happen that
he who is appointed to the office of prelate perceive something in
himself on account of which it is unlawful for him to accept a
prelacy. But this obstacle may sometimes be removed by the very
person who is appointed to the pastoral cure---for instance, if he

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.3.

have a purpose to sin, he may abandon it---and for this reason he is
not excused from being bound to obey definitely the superior who
has appointed him. Sometimes, however, he is unable himself to
remove the impediment that makes the pastoral office unlawful to
him, yet the prelate who appoints him can do so---for instance, if he
be irregular or excommunicate. In such a case he ought to make
known his defect to the prelate who has appointed him; and if the
latter be willing to remove the impediment, he is bound humbly to
obey. Hence when Moses had said (Ex. 4:10): "I beseech thee, Lord, I
am not eloquent from yesterday, and the day before," the Lord
answered (Ex. 4:12): "I will be in thy mouth, and I will teach thee what
thou shalt speak." At other times the impediment cannot be
removed, neither by the person appointing nor by the one
appointed---for instance, if an archbishop be unable to dispense
from an irregularity; wherefore a subject, if irregular, would not be
bound to obey him by accepting the episcopate or even sacred
orders.
Reply to Objection 3: It is not in itself necessary for salvation to
accept the episcopal office, but it becomes necessary by reason of
the superior's command. Now one may lawfully place an obstacle to
things thus necessary for salvation, before the command is given;
else it would not be lawful to marry a second time, lest one should
thus incur an impediment to the episcopate or holy orders. But this
would not be lawful in things necessary for salvation. Hence the
Blessed Mark did not act against a precept by cutting off his finger,
although it is credible that he did this by the instigation of the Holy
Ghost, without which it would be unlawful for anyone to lay hands on
himself. If a man take a vow not to accept the bishop's office, and by
this intend to bind himself not even to accept it in obedience to his
superior prelate, his vow is unlawful; but if he intend to bind himself,
so far as it lies with him, not to seek the episcopal office, nor to
accept it except under urgent necessity, his vow is lawful, because
he vows to do what it becomes a man to do.