that God assents more when called on by ourselves than by others; and that he
often delays the giving, not from the wish that we should be utterly perplexed,
nor to send us out with empty hands; but in order that he may become the author
of greater good things to us— these three points I will endeavour to make
evident by the parable which has today been read to you. The woman of
Chanaan had come to Christ praying on behalf of a daughter possessed by a
demon, and crying out with much earnestness (it says, "Have pity on me, Lord,
my daughter is badly possessed by a demon.") See, the woman of a strange
nation, and a barbarian, and outside of the Jewish commonwealth. For indeed
what else (was she) than a dog, and unworthy of the receiving her request? For
"it is not," he says, "good to take the children's bread, and to give it to the dogs."
But, all the same, from her assiduity, she became worthy. For not only did he
admit her into the nobility of children, dog as she was; but also he sent her off
with that high encomium saying, "O woman great is your faith; be it done to you
as you will." Now when the Christ says, "great is your faith," seek thou no other
demonstration of the greatness of soul which was in the woman. Do you see
how, from her assiduity the woman, being unworthy, became worthy? Desirest
thou also to learn that we accomplish (our wish) by calling on him by ourselves
more than by others? She cried out, and the disciples having come to him say,
"Let her go away, for she is crying after us:" [Matthew 5:23] and to them he
says, "I am not sent, unless to the lost sheep of the house of Israel."
[Matthew 5:24] But when she had come to him by herself and continued crying,
and saying, "Yes, Lord, for even the dogs eat from the table of their masters,"
then he granted the favour and says, "Be it done unto you as you will." Do you
see how, when they were entreating him, he repelled; but when she who needed
the gift herself cried out, he assented? For to them he says, "I am not sent, unless
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel;" but to her he said, "Great is your faith;
be it done unto you as you will." Again, at the beginning and in the prelude of
her request he answered nothing; but when both once and twice and thrice she
had come to him, then he granted the boon; by the issue making us believe that

he had delayed the giving, not that he might repel her but that he might display
to us all the woman's endurance. For if he had delayed in order that he might
repel her, he would have not granted it even at the end; but since he was waiting
to display to all her spiritual wisdom, on this account he was silent. For if he had
granted it immediately and at the beginning, we should not have known the
woman's virtue. "Let her go" it says, "because she is clamouring behind us." But
what (says) the Christ? You hear a voice, but I see the mind: I know what she is
going to say. I choose not to permit the treasure hidden in her mind to escape
notice; but I am waiting and keeping silence; in order that having discovered it I
may lay it down in publicity, and make it manifest to all.
13. Having therefore learned all these things, even if we be in sins, and
unworthy of receiving, let us not despair; knowing, that by assiduity of soul we
shall be able to become worthy of the request. Even if we be unaided by
advocate and destitute, let us not faint; knowing that it is a strong advocacy—
the coming to God one's self by one's self with much eagerness. Even if he delay
and defer with respect to the giving, let us not be dispirited; having learned that
the putting it off and delay is a sure proof of caring and love for mankind. If we
have thus persuaded ourselves; and with a soul deeply pained and fervent, and
thoroughly roused purpose; and such as that with which the woman of Chanaan
approached, we too come to him, even if we be dogs; even if we have done
anything whatever dreadful; we shall both rebut our own crimes, and obtain so
great liberty of speech as also to be advocates for others; in the way in which
also this woman of Chanaan not only herself enjoyed liberty of speech and ten
thousand encomiums but had power to snatch her dear daughter out of her
intolerable sufferings. For nothing— nothing is more powerful than prayer when
fervent and genuine. This both disperses present dangers, and rescues from the
penalties which take place at that hour. That therefore we may both complete our
passage through the present life with ease, and depart there with confidence,
with much zeal and eagerness let us perform this perpetually. For thus shall we
be able both to attain the good things which are laid up, and to enjoy those