Harvey remarks here, that this can hardly be the same presbyter mentioned before, "who was only a hearer of those who
had heard the apostles. Irenæus may here mean the venerable martyr Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna."

Eph. iv. 5, 6.

seem consistent to him, if he for his part diligently read the Scriptures in company with those
who are presbyters in the Church, among whom is the apostolic doctrine, as I have pointed out.
2. For all the apostles taught that there were indeed two testaments among the two peoples; but
that it was one and the same God who appointed both for the advantage of those men (for whose
sakes the testaments were given) who were to believe in God, I have proved in the third book from
the very teaching of the apostles; and that the first testament was not given without reason, or to
no purpose, or in an accidental sort of manner; but that it subdued those to whom it was given
to the service of God, for their benefit (for God needs no service from men), and exhibited a type
of heavenly things, inasmuch as man was not yet able to see the things of God through means of
immediate vision; and foreshadowed the images of those things which [now actually] exist in
the Church, in order that our faith might be firmly established; and contained a prophecy of
things to come, in order that man might learn that God has foreknowledge of all things.

### Chapter XXXIII.—Whosoever confesses that one God is the author of both Testaments, and
diligently reads the Scriptures in company with the presbyters of the Church, is a true spiritual
disciple; and he will rightly understand and interpret all that the prophets have declared
respecting Christ and the liberty of the New Testament.
1. A spiritual disciple of this sort truly receiving the Spirit of God, who was from the beginning,
in all the dispensations of God, present with mankind, and announced things future, revealed things
present, and narrated things past—[such a man] does indeed "judge all men, but is himself judged
by no man." For he judges the Gentiles, "who serve the creature more than the Creator," and
with a reprobate mind spend all their labour on vanity. And he also judges the Jews, who do not
accept of the word of liberty, nor are willing to go forth free, although they have a Deliverer present
[with them]; but they pretend, at a time unsuitable [for such conduct], to serve, [with observances]
beyond [those required by] the law, God who stands in need of nothing, and do not recognise the

"Constabit ei."

[If this and the former chapter seem to us superfluous, we must reflect that such testimony, from the beginning, has
established the unity of Holy Scripture, and preserved to us—the Bible.]
has the mind of God's Spirit is the only judge of spiritual things. Worldly men are incompetent critics of Scripture and of Christian
exposition.