you had committed fornication; I would not therefore come and make you sorry:
for had I come, I must needs have enquired into the matter, and prosecuted and
punished, and exacted justice from many. I judged it then better to be away and
to give opportunity for repentance, than to be with you and to prosecute, and be
still more incensed. For towards the end of this Epistle he has plainly declared it,
saying, "I fear lest when I come, my God should humble me before you, and that
I should mourn for many of them that have sinned heretofore, and repented not
of the lasciviousness and uncleanness which they committed." [2 Corinthians
12:20-21] This therefore here also he intimates, and he says it indeed as in his
own defence; yet rebukes them most severely and puts them in fear; for he
implied that they were open to punishment, and will also have somewhat to
suffer, unless they be quickly reformed. And he says the same thing again at the
end of the Epistle thus; "If I come again, I will not spare." [2 Corinthians 13:2]
Only there he says it more plainly: but here, as it was the proem, he does not say
it so but in a repressed tone; nor is he content even with this, but he softens it
down, applying a corrective. For seeing the expression was that of one asserting
great authority, (for a man spares those whom he has also power to punish,) in
order to relieve it, and draw a shade over what seems harsh, he says,

2 Corinthians 1:24
"Not for that we have lordship over your faith."
That is, I did not therefore say, "To spare you I came not," as lording it over
you. Again, he said not you, but "your faith," which was at once gentler and
truer. For him that has no mind to believe, who has power to compel?
"But are helpers of your joy."
For since, says he, your joy is ours, I came not, that I might not plunge you
into sorrow and increase my own despondency; but I stayed away that you being
reformed by the threat might be made glad. For we do every thing in order to
your joy, and give diligence in this behalf, because we are ourselves partakers of
it. "For by faith you stand."
Behold him again speaking repressedly. For he was afraid to rebuke them
again; since he had handled them severely in the former Epistle, and they had
made some reformation. And if, now that they were reformed, they again
received the same reproof, this was likely to throw them back. Whence this
Epistle is much gentler than the former.

2 Corinthians 1:25
"But I determined for myself that I would not come again to you with
sorrow."
The expression "again" proves that he had already been made sorry from
thence, and while he seems to be speaking in his own defence he covertly
rebukes them. Now if they had both already made him sorry and were about
again to make him sorry, consider how great the displeasure was likely to be. But
he says not thus, 'You made me sorry,' but turns the expression differently yet
implying the very same thing thus, 'For this cause I came not that I might not
make you sorry:' which has the same force as what I said, but is more palatable.