frivolities, and ridiculous difficulties. Wherefore Paul said, "The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit." [1 Corinthians 2:14] Yet even in this he
preserved his reverence for Christ, for he did not mock at what had been said,
but, deeming it impossible, held his peace. There were two difficulties; a Birth of
this kind, and the Kingdom; for neither had the name of the Kingdom ever been
heard among the Jews, nor of a Birth like this. But he stops for a while at the
first, which most astonished his mind.
Let us then, knowing this, not enquire into things relating to God by
reasoning, nor bring heavenly matters under the rule of earthly consequences,
nor subject them to the necessity of nature; but let us think of all reverently,
believing as the Scriptures have said; for the busy and curious person gains
nothing, and besides not finding what he seeks, shall suffer extreme punishment.
You have heard, that (the Father) begot (the Son): believe what you have heard;
but do ask not, "How," and so take away the Generation; to do so would be
extreme folly. For if this man, because, on hearing of a Generation, not that
ineffable Generation, but this which is by grace, he conceived nothing great
concerning it, but human and earthly thoughts, was therefore darkened and in
doubt, what punishment must they deserve, who are busy and curious about that
most awful Generation, which transcends all reason and intellect? For nothing
causes such dizziness as human reasoning, all whose words are of earth, and
which cannot endure to be enlightened from above. Earthly reasonings are full of
mud, and therefore need we streams from heaven, that when the mud has settled,
the clearer portion may rise and mingle with the heavenly lessons; and this
comes to pass, when we present an honest soul and an upright life. For certainly
it is possible for the intellect to be darkened, not only by unseasonable curiosity,
but also by corrupt manners; wherefore Paul has said to the Corinthians, "I have
fed you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto you were not able to bear it,
neither yet now are you able, for you are yet carnal; for whereas there is among
you envying, and strife, and divisions, are you not carnal?" [1 Corinthians 3:2]
And also in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and in many places, one may see Paul

asserting that this is the cause of evil doctrines; for that the soul possessed by
passions cannot behold anything great or noble, but as if darkened by a sort of
film suffers most grievous dimsightedness.
Let us then cleanse ourselves, let us kindle the light of knowledge, let us not
sow among thorns. What the thorns are, you know, though we tell you not; for
often you have heard Christ call the cares of this present life, and the
deceitfulness of riches, by this name. [Matthew 13:22] And with reason. For as
thorns are unfruitful, so are these things; as thorns tear those that handle them, so
do these passions; as thorns are readily caught by the fire, and hateful by the
husbandman, so too are the things of the world; as in thorns, wild beasts, and
snakes, and scorpions hide themselves, so do they in the deceitfulness of riches.
But let us kindle the fire of the Spirit, that we may consume the thorns, and drive
away the beasts, and make the field clear for the husbandman; and after
cleansing it, let us water it with the streams of the Spirit, let us plant the fruitful
olive, that most kindly of trees, the evergreen, the light-giving, the nutritious, the
wholesome. All these qualities has almsgiving, which is, as it were, a seal on
those that possess it. This plant not even death when it comes causes to wither,
but ever it stands enlightening the mind, feeding the sinews of the soul, and
rendering its strength mightier. And if we constantly possess it, we shall be able
with confidence to behold the Bridegroom, and to enter into the bridal chamber;
to which may we all attain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.