inflicted it, but even more. For it is not an equal offense to wound and to hinder
that which is wounded from being healed; for this indeed necessarily genders
death, but that not necessarily. Now I have spoken thus to you; that you may join
in the anger of your rulers whenever they are indignant justly; that when you see
any one rebuked, you may all shun him more than does the teacher. Let him that
has offended fear you more than his rulers. For if he is afraid of his teacher only,
he will readily sin: but if he have to dread so many eyes, so many tongues, he
will be in greater safety. For as, if we do not thus act, we shall suffer the
extremest punishment; so, if we perform these things, we shall partake of the
gain that accrues from his reformation. Thus then let us act; and if any one shall
say, 'be humane towards your brother, this is a Christian's duty.' let him be
taught, that he is humane who is angry [with him], not he who sets him at ease
prematurely and allows him not even to come to a sense of his transgression. For
which, tell me, pities the man in a fever and laboring under delirium, he that lays
him on his bed, and binds him down, and keeps him from meats and drinks that
are not fit for him; or he that allows him to glut himself with strong drink, and
orders him to have his liberty, and to act in every respect as one that is in health?
Does not this person even aggravate the distemper, the man that seems to act
humanely, whereas the other amends it? Such truly ought our decision to be in
this case also. For it is the part of humanity, not to humor the sick in every thing
nor to flatter their unseasonable desires. No one so loved him that committed
fornication among the Corinthians, as Paul who commands to deliver him to
Satan; no one so hated him as they that applaud and court him; and the event
showed it. For they indeed both puffed him up and increased his inflammation;
but [the Apostle] both lowered it and left him not until he brought him to perfect
health. And they indeed added to the existing mischief, he eradicated even that
which existed from the first. These laws, then, of humanity let us learn also. For
if you see a horse hurrying down a precipice, you apply a bit and holdest him in
with violence and lashest him frequently; although this is punishment, yet the
punishment itself is the mother of safety. Thus act also in the case of those that

sin. Bind him that has transgressed until he have appeased God; let him not go
loose, that he be not bound the faster by the anger of God. If I bind, God does
not chain; if I bind not, the indissoluble chains await him. For if we judged
ourselves, we should not be judged. [1 Corinthians 11:31] Think not, then, that
thus to act comes of cruelty and inhumanity; nay, but of the highest gentleness
and the most skillful leechcraft and of much tender care. But, says one, they
have been punished for a long time. How long? Tell me. A year, and two, and
three years? Howbeit, I require not this, length of time, but amendment of soul.
This then show, whether they have been pricked to the heart, whether they have
reformed, and all is done: since if there be not this, there is no advantage in the
time. For neither do we inquire whether the wound has been often bandaged, but
whether the bandage has been of any service. If therefore it has been of service,
although in a short time, let it be kept on no longer: but if it has done no service,
even at the end of ten years, let it be still kept on: and let this fix the term of
release, the good of him that is bound. If we are thus careful both of ourselves
and of others, and regard not honor and dishonor at the hands of men; but
bearing in mind the punishment and the disgrace that is there, and above all the
provoking of God, apply with energy the medicines of repentance: we shall both
presently arrive at the perfect health, and shall obtain the good things to come;
which may all we obtain, through the grace and love towards men of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might,
honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.