19. Our final happiness is in God alone; and to Him alone the honour of latria is to be
paid (B. III, Chap.CXX). But our happiness is in God the Son: This is life
everlasting, that they know thee, and him whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ (John xvii,
3). And it is said: That all may honour the Son, as they honour the Father (John v, 23);
and again, Adore him, all ye angels (Ps. xcvi, 8), which the Apostle (Heb. i, 6) quotes as
applying to the Son.
Taught by these and similar evidences of Holy Scripture, the Catholic Church confesses
Christ to be the true and natural Son of God, co-eternal and equal with the Father; true
God, of the same essence and nature with the Father; begotten, not created, nor made.
Hence it appears that the faith of the Catholic Church alone truly confesses generation
in God, referring the generation of the Son to the fact of His receiving the divine nature
of the Father. Other teachers heretically refer this generation to a nature extraneous to
Godhead, -- Photinus and Sabellius to a human nature; Arius not to a human indeed,
but still to a created nature, more honorable than other creatures. Arius further differs
from Sabellius and Photinus in asserting that this generation was before the creation of
the world, while they say that it was not before the Virgin birth. Sabellius however differs
from Photinus in this, that Sabellius confesses Christ to be true God by nature, which
neither Photinus nor Arius confesses; but Photinus says that He was a mere man, Arius
that He was a sort of compound super-excellent creature, at once divine and human.
Photinus and Arius confess that the person of the Father and of the Son is different,
which Sabellius denies. The Catholic faith therefore, taking the middle course (media
via incedens) confesses, with Arius and Photinus against Sabellius, that the person of
the Father and of the Son is different, the Son being begotten, the Father absolutely
unbegotten; but with Sabellius against Photinus and Arius, that Christ is true God by
nature, and of the same nature with the Father, -- albeit not of the same person. Hence
we gather some inkling of the truth of the Catholic position: for to the truth, as the
Philosopher says, even false opinions testify; whereas false opinions are at
variance, not only with the truth, but with one another.

## CHAPTER VIII--Explanation of the Texts which Arius used to allege for himself
THAT they may know thee, the only true God (John xvii, 3) is not to be taken to mean
that the Father alone is true God, as though the Son were not true God, but that the one
sole true Godhead belongs to the Father, without however the Son being excluded from
it. Hence John, interpreting these words of the Lord, attributes to the true Son both
these titles which here our Lord ascribes to His Father: That we may know the true God,
and be in his true Son Jesus Christ: this is the true God and life everlasting (1 John v,
20). But even though the Son had confessed that the Father alone is true God, He
should not for that be understood Himself as Son to be excluded from Godhead; for
since the Father and the Son are one God, whatever is said of the Father by reason of
His Divinity is as though it were said of the Son, and conversely. Thus the Lord's saying:
No one knoweth the Son but the Father, nor does any one know the Father but the Son
(Matt. xi, 27), is not to be understood as excluding the Father from knowledge of
Himself, or the Son either.
2. In the text, Whom in his own time he will show forth, who is blessed and alone
powerful, King of Kings and Lord of Lords (1 Tim.. vi, 15), it is not the Father that is
named, but that which is common to the Father and the Son. For that the Son also is
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, is manifestly shown in the text: He was clad in a
garment sprinkled with blood, and his name was called, the Word of God: and he hath
on his garment and on his thigh written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Apoc. xix, 13,
16).
3. The sense of the text, the Father is greater than I (John xiv, 28), is taught us by the
Apostle (Phil. ii, 6). For since `greater' is relative to `less,' this must be understood of the
Son according as He is made less; and He was made less in His taking the form of a
servant, yet withal being equal to God the Father in the form of God. And no wonder if
on this account the Father is said to be greater than Him, since the Apostle says that He
was even made less than the angels: That Jesus, who was made a little less than the
angels, we have seen crowned with glory and honour for his suffering of death (Heb. ii,
9.: cf. Ps. viii, 4-6).
4. Then the Son also himself shall be subject to him who subjected to him all things.