marriage garment?
Call to mind those holy persons, of whom I discoursed to you of late, them
that wear garments of hair, them that dwell in the deserts. These above all are the
wearers of the garments of that wedding; this is evident from hence, that how
many soever purple robes thou were to give them, they would not choose to
receive them; but much as a king, if any one were to take the beggar's rags, and
exhort him to put them on, would abhor the clothing, so would those persons
also his purple robe. And from no other cause have they this feeling, but because
of knowing the beauty of their own raiment. Therefore even that purple robe
they spurn like the spider's web. For these things has their sackcloth taught them;
for indeed they are far more exalted and more glorious than the very king who
reigns.
And if you were able to open the doors of the mind, and to look upon their
soul, and all their ornaments within, surely you would fall down upon the earth,
not bearing the glory of their beauty, and the splendor of those garments, and the
lightning brightness of their conscience.
For we could tell also of men of old, great and to be admired; but since
visible examples lead on more those of grosser souls, therefore do I send you
even to the tabernacles of those holy persons. For they have nothing sorrowful,
but as if in heaven they had pitched their tents, even so are they encamped far off
the wearisome things of this present life, in campaign against the devils; and as
in choirs, so do they war against him. Therefore I say, they have fixed their tents,
and have fled from cities, and markets, and houses. For he that wars cannot sit in
a house, but he must make his habitation of a temporary kind, as on the point of
removing straightway, and so dwell. Such are all those persons, contrary to us.
For we indeed live not as in a camp, but as in a city at peace.
For who in a camp ever lays foundation, and builds himself a house, which
he is soon after to leave? There is not one; but should any one attempt it, he is
put to death as a traitor. Who in a camp buys acres of land, and makes for
himself trades? There is not one, and very reasonably. "For you have come

here," they would say, "to fight, not to traffic; why then do you trouble yourself
about the place, which in a little time you will leave? When we are gone away to
our country, do these things."
The same do I now say to you also. When we have removed to the city that
is above, do these things: or rather you will have no need of labors there; after
that the king will do all things for you. But here it is enough to dig a ditch round
only, and to fix a palisade, but of building houses there is no need.
Hear what was the life of the Scythians, that lived in their wagons, such, as
they say, are the habits of the shepherd tribes. So ought Christians to live; to go
about the world, warring against the devil, rescuing the captives held in
subjection by him, and to be in freedom from all worldly things.
Why do you prepare a house, O man, that you may bind yourself more?
Why do you bury a treasure, and invite the enemy against yourself? Why do you
compass yourself with walls, and prepare a prison for yourself?
But if these things seem to you to be hard, let us go away unto the tents of
those men, that by their deeds we may learn the easiness thereof. For they having
set up huts, if they must depart from these, depart like as soldiers, having left
their camp in peace. For so likewise are they encamped, or rather even much
more beautifully.
For indeed it is more pleasant to behold a desert containing huts of monks
in close succession, than soldiers stretching the canvas in a camp, and fixing
spears, and suspending from the point of the spears saffron garments, and a
multitude of men having heads of brass, and the bosses of the shields glistening
much, and men armed all throughout with steel, and royal courts hastily made,
and ground levelled far, and men dining and piping. For neither is this spectacle
so delightful as that of which I now speak.
For if we were to go away into the wilderness, and look at the tents of
Christ's soldiers, we shall see not canvas stretched, neither points of spears, nor
golden garments making a royal pavilion; but like as if any one upon an earth
much larger than this earth, yea infinite, had stretched out many heavens, strange