will be evident that the earthly element must predominate, since the
element that is least active, namely, the earth, must be the most
abundant in quantity in order that the mingling may be duly
tempered in the body of the animal. But if considered as by nature
constituted to move with certain specific motions, thus they have
some special affinity with the bodies in which they move; and hence
the words in which their generation is described.
Reply to Objection 3: The air, as not being so apparent to the senses,
is not enumerated by itself, but with other things: partly with the
water, because the lower region of the air is thickened by watery
exhalations; partly with the heaven as to the higher region. But birds
move in the lower part of the air, and so are said to fly "beneath the
firmament," even if the firmament be taken to mean the region of
clouds. Hence the production of birds is ascribed to the water.
Reply to Objection 4: Nature passes from one extreme to another
through the medium; and therefore there are creatures of
intermediate type between the animals of the air and those of the
water, having something in common with both; and they are
reckoned as belonging to that class to which they are most allied,
through the characters possessed in common with that class, rather
than with the other. But in order to include among fishes all such
intermediate forms as have special characters like to theirs, the
words, "Let the waters bring forth the creeping creature having life,"
are followed by these: "God created great whales," etc.
Reply to Objection 5: The order in which the production of these
animals is given has reference to the order of those bodies which
they are set to adorn, rather than to the superiority of the animals
themselves. Moreover, in generation also the more perfect is
reached through the less perfect.

## QUESTION 72 — ON THE WORK OF THE SIXTH DAY

ARTICLE UNIQUE
We must now consider the work of the sixth day.
Objection 1: It would seem that this work is not fittingly described.
For as birds and fishes have a living soul, so also have land animals.
But these animals are not themselves living souls. Therefore the
words, "Let the earth bring forth the living creature," should rather
have been, "Let the earth bring forth the living four-footed
creatures."
Objection 2: Further, a genus ought not to be opposed to its species.
But beasts and cattle are quadrupeds. Therefore quadrupeds ought
not to be enumerated as a class with beasts and cattle.
Objection 3: Further, as animals belong to a determinate genus and
species, so also does man. But in the making of man nothing is said
of his genus and species, and therefore nothing ought to have been
said about them in the production of other animals, whereas it is
said "according to its genus" and "in its species."
Objection 4: Further, land animals are more like man, whom God is
recorded to have blessed, than are birds and fishes. But as birds and
fishes are said to be blessed, this should have been said, with much
more reason, of the other animals as well.
Objection 5: Further, certain animals are generated from
putrefaction, which is a kind of corruption. But corruption is
repugnant to the first founding of the world. Therefore such animals
should not have been produced at that time.
Objection 6: Further, certain animals are poisonous, and injurious to
man. But there ought to have been nothing injurious to man before
man sinned. Therefore such animals ought not to have been made
by God at all, since He is the Author of good; or at least not until