THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.3.

body result from an overflow of the soul's glory on to the body, as
we shall explain further on, in treating of glorified bodies (XP,
Question 82): and it has been said above (Question 13, Article 3, ad
1; Question 16, Article 1, ad 2) that before His Passion Christ
"allowed His flesh to do and to suffer what was proper to
it" (Damascene, De Fide Orth. iii): nor was there such an overflow of
glory from His soul on to His body.
We must therefore say that all these things took place miraculously
by Divine power. Whence Augustine says (Sup. Joan. Tract. 121):
"To the substance of a body in which was the Godhead closed doors
were no obstacle. For truly He had power to enter in by doors not
open, in Whose Birth His Mother's virginity remained inviolate." And
Dionysius says in an epistle (Ad Caium iv) that "Christ excelled man
in doing that which is proper to man: this is shown in His
supernatural conception, of a virgin, and in the unstable waters
bearing the weight of earthly feet."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ's Mother remained a virgin after

His birth?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Mother did not remain a
virgin after His Birth. For it is written (Mt. 1:18): "Before Joseph and
Mary came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost."
Now the Evangelist would not have said this---"before they came
together"---unless he were certain of their subsequent coming
together; for no one says of one who does not eventually dine
"before he dines" (cf. Jerome, Contra Helvid.). It seems, therefore,
that the Blessed Virgin subsequently had intercourse with Joseph;
and consequently that she did not remain a virgin after (Christ's)
Birth.
Objection 2: Further, in the same passage (Mt. 1:20) are related the
words of the angel to Joseph: "Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife." But marriage is consummated by carnal intercourse. Therefore
it seems that this must have at some time taken place between Mary
and Joseph: and that, consequently she did not remain a virgin after
(Christ's) Birth.
Objection 3: Further, again in the same passage a little further on
(Mt. 1:24,25) we read: "And" (Joseph) "took unto him his wife; and he
knew her not till she brought forth her first-born Son." Now this
conjunction "till" is wont to designate a fixed time, on the completion
of which that takes place which previously had not taken place. And
the verb "knew" refers here to knowledge by intercourse (cf. Jerome,
Contra Helvid.); just as (Gn. 4:1) it is said that "Adam knew his wife."
Therefore it seems that after (Christ's) Birth, the Blessed Virgin was
known by Joseph; and, consequently, that she did not remain a
virgin after the Birth (of Christ).
Objection 4: Further, "first-born" can only be said of one who has
brothers afterwards: wherefore (Rm. 8:29): "Whom He foreknew, He
also predestinated to be made conformable to the image of His Son;
that He might be the first-born among many brethren." But the
evangelist calls Christ the first-born by His Mother. Therefore she
had other children after Christ. And therefore it seems that Christ's
Mother did not remain a virgin after His Birth.
Objection 5: Further, it is written (Jn. 2:12): "After this He went down