THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.8.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether trine immersion is essential to Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that trine immersion is essential to Baptism.
For Augustine says in a sermon on the Symbol, addressed to the
Neophytes: "Rightly were you dipped three times, since you were
baptized in the name of the Trinity. Rightly were you dipped three
times, because you were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, Who
on the third day rose again from the dead. For that thrice repeated
immersion reproduces the burial of the Lord by which you were
buried with Christ in Baptism." Now both seem to be essential to
Baptism, namely, that in Baptism the Trinity of Persons should be
signified, and that we should be conformed to Christ's burial.
Therefore it seems that trine immersion is essential to Baptism.
Objection 2: Further, the sacraments derive their efficacy from
Christ's mandate. But trine immersion was commanded by Christ:
for Pope Pelagius II wrote to Bishop Gaudentius: "The Gospel
precept given by our Lord God Himself, our Saviour Jesus Christ,
admonishes us to confer the sacrament of Baptism to each one in
the name of the Trinity and also with trine immersion." Therefore,
just as it is essential to Baptism to call on the name of the Trinity, so
is it essential to baptize by trine immersion.
Objection 3: Further, if trine immersion be not essential to Baptism,
it follows that the sacrament of Baptism is conferred at the first
immersion; so that if a second or third immersion be added, it seems
that Baptism is conferred a second or third time. which is absurd.
Therefore one immersion does not suffice for the sacrament of
Baptism, and trine immersion is essential thereto.
On the contrary, Gregory wrote to the Bishop Leander: "It cannot be
in any way reprehensible to baptize an infant with either a trine or a
single immersion: since the Trinity can be represented in the three
immersions, and the unity of the Godhead in one immersion."
I answer that As stated above (Article 7, ad 1), washing with water is
of itself required for Baptism, being essential to the sacrament:
whereas the mode of washing is accidental to the sacrament.
Consequently, as Gregory in the words above quoted explains, both
single and trine immersion are lawful considered in themselves;
since one immersion signifies the oneness of Christ's death and of

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.9.

the Godhead; while trine immersion signifies the three days of
Christ's burial, and also the Trinity of Persons.
But for various reasons, according as the Church has ordained, one
mode has been in practice, at one time, the other at another time. For
since from the very earliest days of the Church some have had false
notions concerning the Trinity, holding that Christ is a mere man,
and that He is not called the "Son of God" or "God" except by reason
of His merit, which was chiefly in His death; for this reason they did
not baptize in the name of the Trinity, but in memory of Christ's
death, and with one immersion. And this was condemned in the early
Church. Wherefore in the Apostolic Canons (xlix) we read: "If any
priest or bishop confer baptism not with the trine immersion in the
one administration, but with one immersion, which baptism is said to
be conferred by some in the death of the Lord, let him be deposed":
for our Lord did not say, "Baptize ye in My death," but "In the name
of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."
Later on, however, there arose the error of certain schismatics and
heretics who rebaptized: as Augustine (Super. Joan., cf. De Haeres.
lxix) relates of the Donatists. Wherefore, in detestation of their error,
only one immersion was ordered to be made, by the (fourth) council
of Toledo, in the acts of which we read: "In order to avoid the
scandal of schism or the practice of heretical teaching let us hold to
the single baptismal immersion."
But now that this motive has ceased, trine immersion is universally
observed in Baptism: and consequently anyone baptizing otherwise
would sin gravely, through not following the ritual of the Church. It
would, however, be valid Baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: The Trinity acts as principal agent in Baptism.
Now the likeness of the agent enters into the effect, in regard to the
form and not in regard to the matter. Wherefore the Trinity is
signified in Baptism by the words of the form. Nor is it essential for
the Trinity to be signified by the manner in which the matter is used;
although this is done to make the signification clearer.
In like manner Christ's death is sufficiently represented in the one
immersion. And the three days of His burial were not necessary for
our salvation, because even if He had been buried or dead for one
day, this would have been enough to consummate our redemption: