them back to their first expressions. He alludes to it also in the middle of the
Epistle, "Did you suffer so many things in vain? If it be indeed in vain."
[Galatians 3:4] "You are removing;" he says not, "you are removed," that is, "I
will not believe or suppose that your seduction is complete;" this is the language
of one about to recover them, which further on he expresses yet more clearly in
the words, "I have confidence to you-ward in the Lord that you will be none
otherwise minded." [Galatians 5:10]
"From Him that called you in the grace of Christ."
The calling is from the Father, but the cause of it is the Son. He it is who
has brought about reconciliation and bestowed it as a gift, for we were not saved
by works in righteousness: or I should rather say that these blessings proceed
from Both; as He says, "Mine are Yours, and Yours are Mine." [John 17:10] He
says not "you are removing from the Gospel" but "from God who called you," a
more frightful expression, and more likely to affect them. Their seducers did not
act abruptly but gradually, and while they removed them from the faith in fact,
left names unchanged. It is the policy of Satan not to set his snares in open view;
had they urged them to fall away from Christ, they would have been shunned as
deceivers and corrupters, but suffering them so far to continue in the faith, and
putting upon their error the name of the Gospel, without fear they undermined
the building employing the terms which they used as a sort of curtain to conceal
the destroyers themselves. As therefore they gave the name of Gospel to this
their imposture, he contends against the very name, and boldly says, "unto a
different Gospel,"—
Ver. 7. "Which is not another Gospel."
And justly, for there is not another. Nevertheless the Marcionites are misled
by this phrase, as diseased persons are injured even by healthy food, for they
have seized upon it, and exclaim, "So Paul himself has declared there is no other
Gospel." For they do not allow all the Evangelists, but one only, and him
mutilated and confused according to their pleasure. Their explanation of the
words, "according to my Gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ," [Romans

16:25] is sufficiently ridiculous; nevertheless, for the sake of those who are
easily seduced, it is necessary to refute it. We assert, therefore, that, although a
thousand Gospels were written, if the contents of all were the same, they would
still be one, and their unity no wise infringed by the number of writers. So, on
the other hand, if there were one writer only, but he were to contradict himself,
the unity of the things written would be destroyed. For the oneness of a work
depends not on the number of its authors, but on the agreement or
contradictoriness of its contents. Whence it is clear that the four Gospels are one
Gospel; for, as the four say the same thing, its oneness is preserved by the
harmony of the contents, and not impaired by the difference of persons. And
Paul is not now speaking of the number but of the discrepancy of the things
spoken. With justice might they lay hold of this expression, if the Gospels of
Matthew and Luke differed in the signification of their contents, and in their
doctrinal accuracy; but as they are one and the same, let them cease being
senseless and pretending to be ignorant of these things which are plain to the
very children.
Ver. 7. "Only there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel
of Christ."
That is to say, you will not recognize another Gospel, so long as your mind
is sane, so long as your vision remains healthy, and free from distorted and
imaginary phantoms. For as the disordered eye mistakes the object presented to
it, so does the mind when made turbid by the confusion of evil thoughts. Thus
the madman confounds objects; but this insanity is more dangerous than a
physical malady, for it works injury not in the regions of sense, but of the mind;
it creates confusion not in the organ of bodily vision, but in the eye of the
understanding.
"And would pervert the Gospel of Christ." They had, in fact, only
introduced one or two commandments, circumcision and the observance of days,
but he says that the Gospel was subverted, in order to show that a slight
adulteration vitiates the whole. For as he who but partially pares away the image