First, as to his having been lowly and contrite, hear him, after his gospel,
calling himself a publican; for his being also merciful, see him stripping himself
of all and following Jesus; and as to his piety, it is evident from his doctrines.
And his wisdom again it is easy to see from the gospel which he composed, and
his charity (for he cared for the whole world); and the manifestation of his good
works, from the throne on which he is to sit; [Luke 22:30] and his courage too,
"by his departing with joy from the presence of the council." [Acts 5:41]
Let us imitate then this virtue, and most of all his humility and almsgiving,
without which one cannot be saved. And this is shown by the five virgins, and
together with them by the Pharisee. For without virginity indeed it is possible to
see the kingdom, but without almsgiving it cannot be. For this is among the
things that are essential, and hold all together. Not unnaturally then have we
called it the heart of virtue. But this heart, unless it supply breath to all, is soon
extinguished. In the same way then as the fountain also, if it confine its streams
to itself, grows putrid; so it is with the rich also, when they keep their
possessions to themselves. Wherefore even in our common conversation we say,
"great is the consumption of wealth with such a man;" instead of saying, "great
is the abundance, great the treasure." For in truth there is a consumption, not of
the possessors only, but of the riches themselves. Since both garments laid by
spoil, and gold is cankered, and grain is eaten up, and the soul too of their owner
is more than they all cankered and corrupted by the cares of them.
And if you be willing to produce in the midst a miser's soul; like a garment
eaten by innumerable worms, and not having any sound part, even so will you
find it, perforated on all sides by cares; rotted, cankered by sins.
But not such the poor man's soul, the soul of him, I mean, that is voluntarily
poor; but it is resplendent as gold, it shines like a pearl, and it blooms like a rose.
For no moth is there, no thief is there, no worldly care, but as angels converse, so
do they.
Would you see the beauty of this soul? Would you acquaint yourself with
the riches of poverty? He commands not men, but he commands evil spirits. He

stands not at a king's side, but he has taken his stand near to God. He is the
comrade, not of men, but of angels. He has not chests, two, or three, or twenty,
but such an abundance as to account the whole world as nothing. He has not a
treasure, but heaven. He needs not slaves, or rather has his passions for slaves,
has for slaves the motives that rule over kings. For that which commands him
who wears the purple, that motive shrinks before him. And royalty, and gold,
and all such things, he laughs at, as at children's toys; and like hoops, and dice,
and heads, and balls, so does he count all these to be contemptible. For he has an
adorning, which they who play with these things cannot even see.
What then can be superior to this poor man? He has at least heaven for his
pavement; but if the pavement be like this, imagine the roof! But has he not
horses and chariots? Why, what need has he of these, who is to be borne upon
the clouds, and to be with Christ?
Having these things then impressed on our minds, let us, both men and
women, seek after that wealth, and the plenty that cannot be rifled; that we may
attain also unto the kingdom of heaven, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.