born." He put him to shame, saying, "To whom I shall give a sop, when I have
dipped it." And none of these things checked him, but he was seized by
covetousness, as by some madness, or rather by a more grievous disease. For
indeed this is the more grievous madness.
For what would the madman do like this? He poured not forth foam out of
his mouth but he poured forth the murder of his Lord. He distorted not his hands,
but stretched them out for the price of precious blood. Wherefore his madness
was greater, because he was mad being in health.
But he does not utter do you say, sounds without meaning. And what is
more without meaning than this language. "What will you give me, and I will
deliver Him unto you?" [Matthew 26:15] "I will deliver," the devil spoke by that
mouth. But he did not smite the ground with his feet struggling? Nay, how much
better so to struggle, than thus to stand upright. But do you say, he did not cut
himself with stones? Yet how much better, than to do such things as these!
Will ye, that we bring forward the possessed and the covetous, and make a
comparison between the two. But let no one account what is done a reproach to
himself. For we do not reproach the nature, but we lament the act. The possessed
was never clad with garments, cutting himself with stones, and running, he
rushes over rough paths, driven headlong of the devil. Do not these things seem
to be dreadful? What then, if I shall show the covetous doing more grievous
things than these to their own soul, and to such a degree more grievous, that
these are considered child's play compared with those. Will you indeed shun the
pest? Come then, let us see if they are in any respect in a more tolerable state
than they. In none, but even in a more grievous condition; for indeed they are
more objects of shame than ten thousand naked persons. For it were far better to
be naked as to clothing, than being clad with the fruits of covetousness, to go
about like them that celebrate the orgies for Bacchus. For like as they have on
madmen's masks and clothes, so have these also. And much as the nakedness of
the possessed is caused by madness, so does madness produce this clothing, and
the clothing is more miserable than the nakedness.

And this I will hereby endeavor to prove. For whom should we say was
more mad, among madmen themselves; one who should cut himself, or one who
together with himself should hurt those who met him? It is quite clear that it is
this last. The madmen then strip themselves of their clothing, but these all that
meet them. "But these tear their clothes to pieces." And how readily would
every one of those that are injured consent that his garment should be torn, rather
than be stripped of all his substance?
"But those do not aim blows at the face." In the first place, the covetous do
even this, and if not all, yet do all inflict by famine and penury more grievous
pains on the belly.
"But those bite not with the teeth." Would that it were with teeth, and not
with the darts of covetousness fiercer than teeth. "For their teeth are weapons
and darts." For who will feel most pained, he that was bitten once, and
straightway healed, or he that is for ever eaten up by the teeth of penury? For
penury when involuntary is more grievous than furnace or wild beast.
"But those rush not into the deserts like the possessed of devils." Would it
were the deserts, and not the cities, that they overran, and so all in the cities
enjoyed security. For now in this respect again, they are more intolerable than all
the insane, because they do in the cities these things which the others do in the
deserts, making the cities deserts, and like as in a desert, where there is none to
hinder, so plundering the goods of all men.
"But they do not pelt with stones them that meet them." And what is this? Of
stones it were easy to beware; but of the wounds which by paper and ink they
work to the wretched poor (framing writings full of blows without number),
who, out of those that fall in with them, can ever easily beware?
4. And let us see also what they do to themselves. They walk naked up and
down the city, for they have no garment of virtue. But if this does not seem to
them to be a disgrace, this again is of their exceeding madness, for that they have
no feeling of the unseemliness, but while they are ashamed of having their body
naked, they bear about the soul naked, and glory in it. And if you wish, I will tell