his opinion is not to be held. Although, too, it has been asserted by
some that while Damascene did not confess that the Holy Ghost was
from the Son, neither do those words of his express a denial thereof.
Reply to Objection 4: When the Holy Ghost is said to rest or abide in
the Son, it does not mean that He does not proceed from Him; for the
Son also is said to abide in the Father, although He proceeds from
the Father. Also the Holy Ghost is said to rest in the Son as the love
of the lover abides in the beloved; or in reference to the human
nature of Christ, by reason of what is written: "On whom thou shalt
see the Spirit descending and remaining upon Him, He it is who
baptizes" (Jn. 1:33).
Reply to Objection 5: The Word in God is not taken after the
similitude of the vocal word, whence the breath [spiritus] does not
proceed; for it would then be only metaphorical; but after the
similitude of the mental word, whence proceeds love.
Reply to Objection 6: For the reason that the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father perfectly, not only is it not superfluous to say He
proceeds from the Son, but rather it is absolutely necessary.
Forasmuch as one power belongs to the Father and the Son; and
because whatever is from the Father, must be from the Son unless it
be opposed to the property of filiation; for the Son is not from
Himself, although He is from the Father.
Reply to Objection 7: The Holy Ghost is distinguished from the Son,
inasmuch as the origin of one is distinguished from the origin of the
other; but the difference itself of origin comes from the fact that the
Son is only from the Father, whereas the Holy Ghost is from the
Father and the Son; for otherwise the processions would not be
distinguished from each other, as explained above, and in Question
27.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father

through the Son?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Holy Ghost does not proceed
from the Father through the Son. For whatever proceeds from one
through another, does not proceed immediately. Therefore, if the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father through the Son, He does not
proceed immediately; which seems to be unfitting.
Objection 2: Further, if the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
through the Son, He does not proceed from the Son, except on
account of the Father. But "whatever causes a thing to be such is yet
more so." Therefore He proceeds more from the Father than from the
Son.
Objection 3: Further, the Son has His being by generation. Therefore
if the Holy Ghost is from the Father through the Son, it follows that
the Son is first generated and afterwards the Holy Ghost proceeds;
and thus the procession of the Holy Ghost is not eternal, which is
heretical.
Objection 4: Further, when anyone acts through another, the same
may be said conversely. For as we say that the king acts through the
bailiff, so it can be said conversely that the bailiff acts through the
king. But we can never say that the Son spirates the Holy Ghost
through the Father. Therefore it can never be said that the Father
spirates the Holy Ghost through the Son.
On the contrary, Hilary says (De Trin. xii): "Keep me, I pray, in this
expression of my faith, that I may ever possess the Father---namely
Thyself: that I may adore Thy Son together with Thee: and that I may
deserve Thy Holy Spirit, who is through Thy Only Begotten."
I answer that, Whenever one is said to act through another, this
preposition "through" points out, in what is covered by it, some
cause or principle of that act. But since action is a mean between the
agent and the thing done, sometimes that which is covered by the
preposition "through" is the cause of the action, as proceeding from
the agent; and in that case it is the cause of why the agent acts,
whether it be a final cause or a formal cause, whether it be effective
or motive. It is a final cause when we say, for instance, that the