can be more foolish than these words? And every instance of haughty language
immediately draws on itself this reproach. And if I were to set before you every
expression of them that are reckless, you would not be able to distinguish
whether the words are those of a reckless man or a fool. So entirely the same is
this failing and that. And another of a strange nation says again, "I am God and
not man" [Ezech. 28:2]; and another again, Can God save you, or deliver you out
of my hand? [Daniel 3:15] And the Egyptian too, "I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go." [Exodus 5:2] And the foolish body in the Psalmist is of this
character, who has "said in his heart, There is no God." [Psalm 14:1] And Cain,
"Am I my brother's keeper?" [Genesis 4:9] Can you now distinguish whether the
words are those of the reckless or those of the fool? For recklessness going out
of due bounds, and being a departure from reason (whence its name
recklessness, [ἀ] [πόνοια]), makes men both fools and vainglorious. For
likewise, "the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord" [Proverbs 9:10], so
then the beginning of folly is surely not knowing the Lord. If then knowing be
wisdom, and not knowing Him folly, and this ignorance come of haughtiness
([ὑ] [περηφανία]), (for the beginning of haughtiness is the not knowing of the
Lord), then is haughtiness the extreme of folly. Such was Nabal, if not to
Godward, at least toward man, having become senseless from his recklessness.
But he afterwards died of fear. For when any falls from the measure of wisdom,
he becomes at once a coward and bold ([θρασυδειλοὶ] Ar. Eth. iii.), his soul
having been made feeble. For as the body when it loses its proper tone having
become out of condition, is a prey to any disease, thus too the soul when it has
lost its greatness of nature and lowly-mindedness, having gotten any feeble habit
([ἕ] [ξιν]), becomes fearful, as well as bold and unreasonable, and loses its
powers of self-consciousness. And he that has lost these, how is he to know
things above himself? For as he that is seized with a frenzy, when he has so lost
them, knows not even what is right before him; and the eye, when it is dimmed,
darkens all the other members; so does it happen with this recklessness.
Wherefore these are more miserable than the mad, or than those silly by nature.

For like them they stir laughter, and like them they are ill-tempered. And they
are out of their wits as the others are, but they are not pitied as they are. And
they are beside themselves, as are these, but they are not excused, as are these,
but are hated only. And while they have the failings of either, they are bereaved
of the excuse of either, being ridiculous not owing to their words only, but to
their whole appearance also. For why, pray, do you stiffen up your neck? Or why
walk on tiptoe? Why knit up your brows? Why stick your breast out? You can
not make one hair white or black, [Matthew 5:36] and you go with as lofty gait
as if you could command everything. No doubt you would like to have wings,
and not go upon the earth at all! No doubt you would wish to be a prodigy! For
have you not made yourself prodigious now, when you are a man and triest to
fly? Or rather flying from within, and bloated in every limb? What shall I call
you to quit you of your recklessness? Shall I call you ashes, and dust, and
smoke, and pother? I have described your worthlessness to be sure, but still I
have not laid hold of the exact image I wanted. For I want to put their
bloatedness before me, and all its emptiness. What image am I to find then
which will suit with all this? To me it seems to be like tow in a blaze. For it
seems to swell when lighted, and to lift itself up; but when it is submitted to a
slight touch of the hand, it all tumbles down, and turns out to be more worthless
than the veriest ashes. Of this sort are the souls of these men; that empty
inflatedness of theirs even the commonest attack may humble and bring down.
For he that behaves recklessly must of necessity be a thoroughly feeble person,
since the height he has is not a sound one, but even as bubbles are easily burst,
so are these men easily undone. But if you dost not believe, give me a bold
reckless fellow, and you will find him more cowardly than a hare even at the
most trivial circumstance. For as the flame that rises from dry sticks is no sooner
lighted than it becomes dust, but stiff logs do not by their nature easily kindle up,
and then keep up their flame a long time burning; so souls that be stern and firm
are not easily kindled or extinguished; but these men undergo both of these in a
single moment. Since then we know this, let us practise humble-mindedness. For