you He has promised things yet greater than Paradise. But neither has He given
them now, least He should unnerve you in the season of conflicts; nor has He
been silent about them, lest He should quite cast you down with your labors. As
for Adam, he committed but one sin and brought on himself certain death;
whereas we commit ten thousand transgressions daily. Now if he by that one act
brought on himself so great an evil and introduced death; what shall not we
suffer who continually live in sins, and instead of Paradise, have the expectation
of heaven?
The argument is irksome and pains the hearer: were it only by my own
feelings, I know this. For indeed my heart is troubled and throbs; and the more I
see the account of hell confirmed, the more do I tremble and shrink through fear.
But it is necessary to say these things lest we fall into hell. What you received
was not paradise, nor trees and plants, but heaven and the good things in the
heavens. Now if he that had received less was condemned, and no consideration
exempted him, much more shall we who have sinned more abundantly, and have
been called unto greater things, endure the woes without remedy.
Consider, for example, how long a time, but for one single sin, our race
abides in death. Five thousand years and more have passed, and death has not yet
been done away, on account of one single sin. And we cannot even say that
Adam had heard prophets, that he had seen others punished for sins, and it was
meet that he should have been terrified thereby and corrected, were it only by the
example. For he was at that time first, and alone; but nevertheless he was
punished. But you can not have anything of this sort to advance, who after so
many examples art become worse; to whom so excellent a Spirit has been
vouch-safed, and yet you draw upon yourself not one sin, nor two, nor three, but
sins without number! For do not, because the sin is committed in a small
moment, calculate that therefore the punishment also must be a matter of a
moment. Do you see not those men, who for a single theft or a single act of
adultery, committed in a small moment of time, oftentimes have spent their
whole life in prisons, and in mines, struggling with continual hunger and every

kind of death? And there was no one to set them at liberty, or to say, "The offense
took place in a small moment of time; the punishment too should have its time
equivalent to that of the sin."
3. But, "They are men," some one will say, "who do these things; as for
God, He is loving unto men." Now, first of all, not even men do these things in
cruelty, but in humanity. And God Himself, as "He is loving unto men," in the
same character does He punish sins. [Sirach 16:12] "For as His mercy is great,
so also is His reproof." When therefore you say unto me, "God is loving unto
men," then you tell me of so much the greater reason for punishing: namely, our
sinning against such a Being. Hence also Paul said, [Hebrews 10:31] "It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." Endure I beseech you, the
fiery force of the words, for perhaps— perhaps you will have some consolation
from hence! Who among men can punish as God has punished? When He
caused a deluge and entire destruction of a race so numerous; and again, when, a
little while after, He rained fire from above, and utterly destroyed them all?
What punishment from men can be like that? Do you see not that the punishment
even in this world is almost eternal? Four thousand years have passed away, and
the punishment of the Sodomites abides at its height. For as His mercy is great,
so also is His punishment.
Again: if He had imposed any burdensome or impossible things, one might
perhaps have been able to urge difficulty of the laws: but if they be extremely
easy, what can we say for our not regarding even these? Suppose you are unable
to fast or to practice virginity; although you are able if you will, and they who
have been able are a condemnation to us. But, however, God has not used this
strictness towards us; neither has He enjoined these things nor laid them down as
laws, but left the choice to be at the discretion of the hearers. Nevertheless, you
are able to be chaste in marriage; and you are able to abstain from drunkenness.
Are you unable to empty yourself of all your goods? Nay surely you are able;
and they who have done so prove it. But nevertheless He has not enjoined this,
but has commanded not to be rapacious, and of our means to assist those who are