FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.66, C.6.

Reply to Objection 4: The truth and knowledge of indemonstrable
principles depends on the meaning of the terms: for as soon as we
know what is a whole, and what is a part, we know at once that every
whole is greater than its part. Now to know the meaning of being and
non-being, of whole and part, and of other things consequent to
being, which are the terms whereof indemonstrable principles are
constituted, is the function of wisdom: since universal being is the
proper effect of the Supreme Cause, which is God. And so wisdom
makes use of indemonstrable principles which are the object of
understanding, not only by drawing conclusions from them, as other
sciences do, but also by passing its judgment on them, and by
vindicating them against those who deny them. Hence it follows that
wisdom is a greater virtue than understanding.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.66, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether charity is the greatest of the theological

virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not the greatest of the
theological virtues. Because, since faith is in the intellect, while hope
and charity are in the appetitive power, it seems that faith is
compared to hope and charity, as intellectual to moral virtue. Now
intellectual virtue is greater than moral virtue, as was made evident
above (Question 62, Article 3). Therefore faith is greater than hope
and charity.
Objection 2: Further, when two things are added together, the result
is greater than either one. Now hope results from something added
to charity; for it presupposes love, as Augustine says (Enchiridion
viii), and it adds a certain movement of stretching forward to the
beloved. Therefore hope is greater than charity.
Objection 3: Further, a cause is more noble than its effect. Now faith
and hope are the cause of charity: for a gloss on Mt. 1:3 says that
"faith begets hope, and hope charity." Therefore faith and hope are
greater than charity.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:13): "Now there remain
faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), the greatness of a virtue,
as to its species, is taken from its object. Now, since the three
theological virtues look at God as their proper object, it cannot be
said that any one of them is greater than another by reason of its
having a greater object, but only from the fact that it approaches
nearer than another to that object; and in this way charity is greater
than the others. Because the others, in their very nature, imply a
certain distance from the object: since faith is of what is not seen,
and hope is of what is not possessed. But the love of charity is of
that which is already possessed: since the beloved is, in a manner,
in the lover, and, again, the lover is drawn by desire to union with the
beloved; hence it is written (1 Jn. 4:16): "He that abideth in charity,
abideth in God, and God in him."
Reply to Objection 1: Faith and hope are not related to charity in the
same way as prudence to moral virtue; and for two reasons. First,