thanked God, and took courage." [Acts 28:11-15] Already the preaching has
reached to Sicily: see how it has run through (even to those lands): at Puteoli
also they found some: others also came to meet them. Such was the eagerness of
the brethren, it nothing disconcerted them, that Paul was in bonds. But observe
also how Paul himself also was affected after the manner of men. For it says, "he
took courage, when he saw the brethren." Although he had worked so many
miracles, nevertheless even from sight he received an accession (of confidence).
From this we learn, that he was both comforted after the manner of men, and the
contrary. "And when we came to Rome, Paul was suffered to dwell by himself
with a soldier that kept him." [Acts 28:16] Leave was given him to dwell by
himself. No slight proof this also of his being held in much admiration: it is clear
they did not number him among the rest. "And it came to pass, that after three
days he called together them that were the chief of the Jews." After three days he
called the chief of the Jews, that their ears might not be preoccupied. And what
had he in common with them? For they would not (else) have been like to accuse
him. Nevertheless, it was not for this that he cared; it was for the teaching that he
was concerned, and that what he had to say might not offend them.
(Recapitulation.) "And the barbarians," etc. [Acts 28:2] The Jews then,
beholding all the many miracles they did, persecuted and harassed (Paul); but the
barbarians, who had seen none, merely on the ground of his misfortune, were
kind to him.— "No doubt," say they, "this man is a murderer:" [Acts 28:4]. They
do not simply pronounce their judgment, but say, "No doubt," (i.e.) as any one
may see "and vengeance," say they, "suffers him not to live." Why then, they
held also the doctrine of a Providence, and these barbarians were far more
philosophic than the philosophers, who allow not the benefit of a Providence to
extend to things "below the moon:" whereas (these barbarians) suppose God to
be present everywhere, and that although a (guilty) man may escape many (a
danger), he will not escape in the end. And they do not assail him immediately,
but for a time respect him on account of his misfortune: nor do they openly
proclaim their surmise, but speak it "among themselves: a murderer;" for the

bonds led them to suspect this. "They showed no small kindness," and yet (some
of them) were prisoners. Let those be ashamed that say, Do not do good to those
in prison: let these barbarians shame us; for they knew not who these men were,
but simply because they were in misfortune (they were kind): thus much they
perceived, that they were human beings, and therefore they considered them to
have a claim upon their humanity. "And for a great while," it says, "they
expected that he would die." [Acts 28:6] But when he shook his hand, and flung
off the beast, then they saw and were astonished. And the miracle did not take
place suddenly, but the men went by the length of time, "after they had looked a
great while," so plainly was there no deceit, no haste here ([συναρπαγή]).
"Publius," it says, "lodged them courteously" [Acts 28:7]: two hundred and
seventy-six persons. Consider how great the gain of his hospitality: not as of
necessity, not as unwilling, but as reckoning it a gain he lodged them for three
days: thereafter having met with his requital, he naturally honored Paul much
more, when the others also received healing. "Who also," it says, "honored us
with many honors" [Acts 28:10]: not that he received wages, God forbid; but as
it is written, "The workman is worthy of his meat. And when we departed, they
laded us with such things as were necessary." [Matthew 10:10] It is plain that
having thus received them, they also received the word of the preaching: for it is
not to be supposed, that during an entire three months they would have had all
this kindness shown them, had these persons not believed strongly, and herein
exhibited the fruits (of their conversion): so that from this we may see a strong
proof of the great number there was of those that believed. Even this was enough
to establish (Paul's) credit with those (his fellow-voyagers). Observe how in all
this voyage they nowhere touched at a city, but (were cast) on an island, and
passed the entire winter (there, or) sailing— those being herein under training
for faith, his fellow-voyagers, I mean. (a) "And after three months we departed
in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor
and Pollux." [Acts 28:11] Probably this was painted on it: so addicted were they
to their idols. (d) "And when the south wind blew, we came the next day to