1 Corinthians 11:12
"For as the woman is of the man, so is the man also by the woman."
He said not, "of the woman," but he repeats the expression, [from 1
Corinthians 11:7] "of the man." For still this particular prerogative remains entire
with the man. Yet are not these excellencies the property of the man, but of God.
Wherefore also he adds, "but all things of God." If therefore all things belong to
God, and he commands these things, do thou obey and gainsay not.

1 Corinthians 11:13
"Judge ye in yourselves: is it seemly that a woman pray unto God veiled?"
Again he places them as judges of the things said, which also he did respecting
the idol-sacrifices. For as there he says, "judge ye what I say:" [c. 1 Corinthians
10:15] so here, "judge in yourselves:" and he hints something more awful here.
For he says that the affront here passes on unto God: although thus indeed he
does not express himself, but in something of a milder and more enigmatical
form of speech: "is it seemly that a woman pray unto God unveiled?"

1 Corinthians 11:14
"Does not even nature itself teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a
dishonor unto him?"

1 Corinthians 11:15
"But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her; for her hair is given her
for a covering."
His constant practice of stating commonly received reasons he adopts also
in this place, betaking himself to the common custom, and greatly abashing
those who waited to be taught these things from him, which even from men's
ordinary practice they might have learned. For such things are not unknown even
to Barbarians: and see how he every where deals in piercing expressions: "every
man praying having his head covered dishonors his head;" and again, "but if it
be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be veiled:" and here
again, "if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him; but if a woman have long
hair, it is a glory to her, for her hair is given her for a covering."
"And if it be given her for a covering," say you, "wherefore need she add
another covering?" That not nature only, but also her own will may have part in
her acknowledgment of subjection. For that you ought to be covered nature
herself by anticipation enacted a law. Add now, I pray, your own part also, that
you may not seem to subvert the very laws of nature; a proof of most insolent
rashness , to buffet not only with us, but with nature also. This is why God
accusing the Jews said, [Ezekiel 16:21-22] "You have slain your sons and your
daughters: this is beyond all your abominations."
And again, Paul rebuking the unclean among the Romans thus aggravates
the accusation, saying, that their usage was not only against the law of God, but
even against nature. "For they changed the natural use into that which is against
nature." [Romans 1:26] For this cause then here also he employs this argument
signifying this very thing, both that he is not enacting any strange law and that
among Gentiles their inventions would all be reckoned as a kind of novelty
against nature. So also Christ, implying the same, said, "Whatsoever ye would