## Homily 46 on Matthew

Matt. XIII. 24-30.
"Another parable put He forth unto them, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven
is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. But while men slept,
his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. But when
the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares. So the
servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, did you not sow good
seed in your field? Whence then has it tares? He said unto them, An enemy has
done this. The servants said unto him, Will you then that we go and gather them
up? But he said, Nay, lest while you gather up the tares, you root up also the
wheat with them. Let both therefore grow together until the harvest."
What is the difference between this, and the parable before it? There He
speaks of them that have not at all holden with Him, but have started aside, and
have thrown away the seed; but here He means the societies of the heretics. For
in order that not even this might disturb His disciples, He foretells it also, after
having taught them why He speaks in parables. The former parable then means
their not receiving Him; this, their receiving corrupters. For indeed this also is a
part of the devil's craft, by the side of the truth always to bring in error, painting
thereon many resemblances, so as easily to cheat the deceivable. Therefore He
calls it not any other seed, but tares; which in appearance are somewhat like
wheat.
Then He mentions also the manner of his device. For "while men slept,"
says He. It is no small danger, which He hereby suspends over our rulers, to
whom especially is entrusted the keeping of the field; and not the rulers only, but
the subjects too.
And He signifies also that the error comes after the truth, which the actual
event testifies. For so after the prophets, were the false prophets; and after the

apostles, the false apostles; and after Christ, Antichrist. For unless the devil see
what to imitate, or against whom to plot, he neither attempts, nor knows how.
Now then also, having seen that "one brought forth a hundred, another sixty,
another thirty," he proceeds after that another way. That is, not having been able
to carry away what had taken root, nor to choke, nor to scorch it up, he conspires
against it by another craft, privily casting in his own inventions.
And what difference is there, one may say, between them that sleep, and
them that resemble the wayside? That in the latter case he immediately caught it
away; yea, he suffered it not even to take root; but here more of his craft was
needed.
And these things Christ says, instructing us to be always wakeful. For, says
He, though thou quite escape those harms, there is yet another harm. For as in
those instances "the wayside," and "the rock," and "the thorns," so here again
sleep occasions our ruin; so that there is need of continual watchfulness.
Wherefore He also said, "He that endures to the end, the same shall be saved."
[Matthew 10:22]
Something like this took place even at the beginning. Many of the prelates,
I mean, bringing into the churches wicked men, disguised heresiarchs, gave great
facility to the laying that kind of snare. For the devil needs not even to take any
trouble, when he has once planted them among us.
And how is it possible not to sleep? One may say. Indeed, as to natural
sleep, it is not possible; but as to that of our moral faculty, it is possible.
Wherefore Paul also said, "Watch ye, stand fast in the faith."
[1 Corinthians 16:13]
After this He points out the thing to be superfluous too, not hurtful only; in
that, after the land has been tilled, and there is no need of anything, then this
enemy sows again; as the heretics also do, who for no other cause than vainglory
inject their proper venom.
And not by this only, but by what follows likewise, He depicts exactly all
their acting. For, "When the blade was sprung up," says He, "and brought forth