FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.3.

men, according to their present state of life, the final perfection is in
respect of an operation whereby man is united to God: but this
operation neither can be continual, nor, consequently, is it one only,
because operation is multiplied by being discontinued. And for this
reason in the present state of life, perfect happiness cannot be
attained by man. Wherefore the Philosopher, in placing man's
happiness in this life (Ethic. i, 10), says that it is imperfect, and after
a long discussion, concludes: "We call men happy, but only as
men." But God has promised us perfect happiness, when we shall be
"as the angels . . . in heaven" (Mt. 22:30).
Consequently in regard to this perfect happiness, the objection fails:
because in that state of happiness, man's mind will be united to God
by one, continual, everlasting operation. But in the present life, in as
far as we fall short of the unity and continuity of that operation so do
we fall short of perfect happiness. Nevertheless it is a participation
of happiness: and so much the greater, as the operation can be more
continuous and more one. Consequently the active life, which is
busy with many things, has less of happiness than the contemplative
life, which is busied with one thing, i.e. the contemplation of truth.
And if at any time man is not actually engaged in this operation, yet
since he can always easily turn to it, and since he ordains the very
cessation, by sleeping or occupying himself otherwise, to the
aforesaid occupation, the latter seems, as it were, continuous. From
these remarks the replies to Objections 5 and 6 are evident.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether happiness is an operation of the

sensitive part, or of the intellective part only?
Objection 1: It would seem that happiness consists in an operation
of the senses also. For there is no more excellent operation in man
than that of the senses, except the intellective operation. But in us
the intellective operation depends on the sensitive: since "we cannot
understand without a phantasm" (De Anima iii, 7). Therefore
happiness consists in an operation of the senses also.
Objection 2: Further, Boethius says (De Consol. iii) that happiness is
"a state made perfect by the aggregate of all good things." But some
goods are sensible, which we attain by the operation of the senses.
Therefore it seems that the operation of the senses is needed for
happiness.
Objection 3: Further, happiness is the perfect good, as we find
proved in Ethic. i, 7: which would not be true, were not man
perfected thereby in all his parts. But some parts of the soul are
perfected by sensitive operations. Therefore sensitive operation is
required for happiness.
On the contrary, Irrational animals have the sensitive operation in
common with us: but they have not happiness in common with us.
Therefore happiness does not consist in a sensitive operation.
I answer that, A thing may belong to happiness in three ways: (1)
essentially, (2) antecedently, (3) consequently. Now the operation of
sense cannot belong to happiness essentially. For man's happiness
consists essentially in his being united to the Uncreated Good,
Which is his last end, as shown above (Article 1): to Which man
cannot be united by an operation of his senses. Again, in like
manner, because, as shown above (Question 2, Article 5), man's
happiness does not consist in goods of the body, which goods
alone, however, we attain through the operation of the senses.
Nevertheless the operations of the senses can belong to happiness,
both antecedently and consequently: antecedently, in respect of
imperfect happiness, such as can be had in this life, since the
operation of the intellect demands a previous operation of the sense;
consequently, in that perfect happiness which we await in heaven;