them that are sitting by them. To you therefore do I direct my speech, entreating
you neither to be at any time over-taken by this passion, and to draw up as by
cords those who have been so overtaken, that they be not found worse than the
brutes. For they indeed seek nothing more than what is needful, but these have
become even more brutish than they, overpassing the boundaries of moderation.
For how much better is the ass than these men? How much better the dog! For
indeed each of these animals, and of all others, whether it need to eat, or to
drink, acknowledges sufficiency for a limit, and goes not on beyond what it
needs; and though there are innumerable persons to constrain, it will not endure
to go on to excess.
In this respect then we are worse even than the brutes, by the judgment not
of them that are in health only, but even by our own. For that you have judged
yourselves to be baser than both dogs and asses, revealed to Peter, He does
hereby again confirm. And neither at this did He stop, but by His very
condescension declares this self-same truth; an instance of exceeding wisdom.

## Homily 58 on Matthew

MATT. XVII. 22, 23. 'And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto
them, The Son of Man shall be betrayed into the hands of men, and they shall
kill Him, and the third day He shall be raised again. And they were exceeding
sorry.'
THAT is, to hinder their saying, 'wherefore do we abide here continually,'
He speaks to them again of the passion; on hearing which they had no wish so
much as to see Jerusalem. And it is remarkable how, when both Peter had been
rebuked, and Moses and Elias had discoursed concerning it, and had called the
thing glory, and the Father had uttered a voice from above, and so many miracles
had been done, and the resurrection was at the doors (for He said, He should by
no means abide any long time in death, but should be raised the third day); not
even so did they endure it, but were sorry; and not merely sorry, but exceeding
sorry.
Now this arose from their being ignorant as yet of the force of His sayings.
This Mark and Luke indirectly expressing said, the one, 'They understood not the
saying, and were afraid to ask Him:'the other, 'It was hid from them, that they
perceived it not, and they feared to ask Him of that saying.'
And yet if they were ignorant, how were they sorry? Because they were not
altogether ignorant; that He was to die they knew, continually hearing it, but
what this death might be, and that there would be a speedy release from it, and
that it would work innumerable blessings, as yet they knew not clearly; nor what
this resurrection might be: but they understood it not, wherefore they grieved;
for indeed they clung very earnestly to their Master.
'And when they had come to Capernaum, they that received the didrachma
came to Peter, and said, Does not your Master pay the didrachma?'
And what is this 'didrachma?' When God had slain the firstborn of the