"take heed," says He, "that no man deceive you"); and having made them
energetic, and prepared them to be watchful, and has spoken first of the false
Christs, then He speaks of the ills of Jerusalem, assuring them ever by the things
already past, foolish and contentious though they were, of those which were yet
to come.
2. But by "wars and rumors of wars," He means, what I before said, the
troubles coming upon them. After this, because, as I have already said, they
supposed after that war the end would come, see how He warns them, saying,
"But the end is not yet. For nation," He says, "shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom." [Matthew 24:7] Of the preludes to the ills of the
Jews does He speak. "All these are the beginning of sorrows," that is, of those
that befall them. "Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill
you."
In good season did He introduce their ills, having a consolation from the
common miseries; and not in this way only, but also by His adding, that it is "for
my name's sake. For you shall be hated," He says, "of all men for my name's
sake. Then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and many false
Christs and false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. And because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; but he that shall endure
unto the end, the same shall be saved."
This is the greater evil, when the war is intestine too, for there were many
false brethren. Do you see the war to be threefold? From the deceivers, from the
enemies, from the false brethren. See Paul too lamenting over the same things,
and saying, "Without were fightings, within were fears;" [2 Corinthians 7:5] and,
"perils among false brethren," [2 Corinthians 11:26] and again, "For such are
false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of
Christ." [2 Corinthians 11:13]
After this again, what is more grievous than all, they shall not have so much
as the consolation from love. Then indicating, that these things will in no degree
harm the noble and the firm, He says, Fear not, neither be troubled. For if you

show forth the patience that becomes you, the dangers will not prevail over you.
And it is a plain proof of this, that the word shall surely be preached everywhere
in the world, so much shall you be above the things that alarm you. For, that they
may not say, how then shall we live? He said more, You shall both live and
preach everywhere. Therefore He added moreover, "And this gospel shall be
preached in the whole world for a witness to all nations, and then shall the end
come," of the downfall of Jerusalem.
For in proof that He meant this, and that before the taking of Jerusalem the
gospel was preached, hear what Paul says, "Their sound went into all the earth;"
[Romans 10:18] and again, "The gospel which was preached to every creature
which is under Heaven." [Colossians 1:23] And do you see him running from
Jerusalem unto Spain? And if one took so large a portion, consider what the rest
also wrought. For writing to others also, Paul again says concerning the gospel,
that "it is bringing forth fruit, and growing up in every creature which is under
Heaven."
But what means, "For a witness to all nations?" Forasmuch as though it
was everywhere preached, yet it was not everywhere believed. It was for a
witness, He says, to them that were disbelieving, that is, for conviction, for
accusation, for a testimony; for they that believed will bear witness against them
that believed not, and will condemn them. And for this cause, after the gospel is
preached in every part of the world, Jerusalem is destroyed, that they may not
have so much as a shadow of an excuse for their perverseness. For they that saw
His power shine throughout every place, and in an instant take the world captive,
what excuse could they then have for continuing in the same perverseness? For
in proof that it was everywhere preached at that time, hear what Paul says, "of
the gospel which was preached to every creature which is under Heaven."
[Colossians 1:23]
Which also is a very great sign of Christ's power, that in twenty or at most
thirty years the word had reached the ends of the world. "After this therefore,"
says He, "shall come the end of Jerusalem." For that He intimates this was