investigating the truth, then they require of us, by the law of charity, to
make known to them what we have herein been able to find out. "Not as
though I had already attained, either were already perfect" (for, if the
Apostle Paul, how much more must I, who lie far beneath his feet, count
myself not to have apprehended!); but, according to my measure, "if I
forget those things that are behind, and reach forth unto those things
which are before, and press towards the mark for the prize of the high
calling," I am requested to disclose so much of the road as I have already
passed, and the point to which I have reached, whence the course yet
remains to bring me to the end. And those make the request, whom a
generous charity compels me to serve. Needs must too, and God will
grant that, in supplying them with matter to read, I shall profit myself
also; and that, in seeking to reply to their inquiries, I shall myself likewise
find that for which I was inquiring. Accordingly I have undertaken the
task, by the bidding and help of the Lord my God, not so much of
discoursing with authority respecting things I know already, as of
learning those things by piously discoursing of them.

### CHAP. 6.—THAT THE SON IS VERY GOD, OF THE SAME SUBSTANCE WITH THE FATHER. NOT ONLY THE FATHER, BUT THE TRINITY, IS AFFIRMED TO BE IMMORTAL. ALL THINGS ARE NOT FROM THE FATHER ALONE, BUT ALSO FROM THE SON. THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT IS VERY GOD, EQUAL WITH THE FATHER AND THE SON.

9. They who have said that our Lord Jesus Christ is not God, or not very
God, or not with the Father the One and only God, or not truly immortal
because changeable, are proved wrong by the most plain and unanimous
voice of divine testimonies; as, for instance, "In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." For it is
plain that we are to take the Word of God to be the only Son of God, of
whom it is afterwards said, "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us," on account of that birth of His incarnation, which was
wrought in time of the Virgin. But herein is declared, not only that He is
God, but also that He is of the same substance with the Father; because,
after saying, "And the Word was God," it is said also, "The same was in
the beginning with God: all things were made by Him, and without Him
was not anything made." Not simply "all things;" but only all things that

were made, that is, the whole creature. From which it appears clearly,
that He Himself was not made, by whom all things were made. And if He
was not made, then He is not a creature; but if He is not a creature, then
He is of the same substance with the Father. For all substance that is not
God is creature; and all that is not creature is God. And if the Son is not of
the same substance with the Father, then He is a substance that was
made: and if He is a substance that was made, then all things were not
made by Him; but "all things were made by Him," therefore He is of one
and the same substance with the Father. And so He is not only God, but
also very God. And the same John most expressly affirms this in his
epistle: "For we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know the true God, and that we may be in
His true Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.". Hence also it follows by consequence, that the Apostle Paul did not
say, "Who alone has immortality," of the Father merely; but of the One
and only God, which is the Trinity itself. For that which is itself eternal
life is not mortal according to any changeableness; and hence the Son of
God, because "He is Eternal Life," is also Himself understood with the
Father, where it is said, "Who only hath immortality." For we, too, are
made partakers of this eternal life, and become, in our own measure,
immortal. But the eternal life itself, of which we are made partakers, is
one thing; we ourselves, who, by partaking of it, shall live eternally, are
another. For if He had said, "Whom in His own time the Father will show,
who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of
lords; who only hath immortality;" not even so would it be necessarily
understood that the Son is excluded. For neither has the Son separated
the Father from Himself, because He Himself, speaking elsewhere with
the voice of wisdom (for He Himself is the Wisdom of God), says, "I alone
compassed the circuit of heaven." And therefore so much the more is it
not necessary that the words, "Who hath immortality," should be
understood of the Father alone, omitting the Son; when they are said
thus: "That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable,
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: whom in His own time He
will show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and
Lord of lords; who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no
man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom