SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.3.

Lord is my light." Now light may be in a subject in two ways: first, by
way of an abiding form, as material light is in the sun, and in fire;
secondly, by way of a passion, or passing impression, as light is in
the air. Now the prophetic light is not in the prophet's intellect by
way of an abiding form, else a prophet would always be able to
prophesy, which is clearly false. For Gregory says (Hom. i super
Ezech.): "Sometimes the spirit of prophecy is lacking to the prophet,
nor is it always within the call of his mind, yet so that in its absence
he knows that its presence is due to a gift." Hence Eliseus said of the
Sunamite woman (4 Kgs. 4:27): "Her soul is in anguish, and the Lord
hath hid it from me, and hath not told me." The reason for this is that
the intellectual light that is in a subject by way of an abiding and
complete form, perfects the intellect chiefly to the effect of knowing
the principle of the things manifested by that light; thus by the light
of the active intellect the intellect knows chiefly the first principles of
all things known naturally. Now the principle of things pertaining to
supernatural knowledge, which are manifested by prophecy, is God
Himself, Whom the prophets do not see in His essence, although He
is seen by the blessed in heaven, in whom this light is by way of an
abiding and complete form, according to Ps. 35:10, "In Thy light we
shall see light."
It follows therefore that the prophetic light is in the prophet's soul by
way of a passion or transitory impression. This is indicated Ex.
33:22: "When my glory shall pass, I will set thee in a hole of the
rock," etc., and 3 Kgs. 19:11: "Go forth and stand upon the mount
before the Lord; and behold the Lord passeth," etc. Hence it is that
even as the air is ever in need of a fresh enlightening, so too the
prophet's mind is always in need of a fresh revelation; thus a
disciple who has not yet acquired the principles of an art needs to
have every detail explained to him. Wherefore it is written (Is. 1:4):
"In the morning He wakeneth my ear, so that I may hear Him as a
master." This is also indicated by the very manner in which
prophecies are uttered: thus it is stated that "the Lord spake to such
and such a prophet," or that "the word of the Lord," or "the hand of
the Lord was made upon him."
But a habit is an abiding form. Wherefore it is evident that, properly
speaking, prophecy is not a habit.
Reply to Objection 1: This division of the Philosopher's does not
comprise absolutely all that is in the soul, but only such as can be
principles of moral actions, which are done sometimes from passion,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.3.

sometimes from habit, sometimes from mere power, as in the case of
those who perform an action from the judgment of their reason
before having the habit of that action.
However, prophecy may be reduced to a passion, provided we
understand passion to denote any kind of receiving, in which sense
the Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 4) that "to understand is, in a
way, to be passive." For just as, in natural knowledge, the possible
intellect is passive to the light of the active intellect, so too in
prophetic knowledge the human intellect is passive to the
enlightening of the Divine light.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as in corporeal things, when a passion
ceases, there remains a certain aptitude to a repetition of the
passion---thus wood once ignited is more easily ignited again, so too
in the prophet's intellect, after the actual enlightenment has ceased,
there remains an aptitude to be enlightened anew---thus when the
mind has once been aroused to devotion, it is more easily recalled to
its former devotion. Hence Augustine says (De orando Deum. Ep.
cxxx, 9) that our prayers need to be frequent, "lest devotion be
extinguished as soon as it is kindled."
We might, however, reply that a person is called a prophet, even
while his prophetic enlightenment ceases to be actual, on account of
his being deputed by God, according to Jer. 1:5, "And I made thee a
prophet unto the nations."
Reply to Objection 3: Every gift of grace raises man to something
above human nature, and this may happen in two ways. First, as to
the substance of the act---for instance, the working of miracles, and
the knowledge of the uncertain and hidden things of Divine wisdom--and for such acts man is not granted a habitual gift of grace.
Secondly, a thing is above human nature as to the mode but not the
substance of the act---for instance to love God and to know Him in
the mirror of His creatures---and for this a habitual gift of grace is
bestowed.