John 18:17
"Are you not also one of this man's disciples? And he says, I am not."
What do you say, Peter? Did you not declare but now, "If need be that I lay
down my life for You, I will lay it down"? What has happened then, that you can
not even endure the questioning of a door-keeper? Is it a soldier who questions
you? Is it one of those who seized Him? No, it is a mean and abject door-keeper,
nor is the questioning of a rough kind. She says not, "Are you a disciple of that
cheat and corrupter," but, "of that man," which was the expression rather of one
pitying and relenting. But Peter could not bear any of these words. The, "Are you
not also," is said on this account, that John was within. So mildly did the woman
speak. But he perceived none of this, nor took it into his mind, neither the first
time, nor the second, nor the third, but when the cock crew; nor did this even
bring him to his senses, till Jesus gave him the bitter look. And he stood
warming himself with the servants of the high priest, but Christ was kept bound
within. This we say not as accusing Peter, but showing the truth of what had
been said by Christ.

John 18:19
"The high priest then asked Jesus of His disciples, and of His doctrine."
3. O the wickedness! Though he had continually heard Him speaking in the
temple and teaching openly, he now desires to be informed. For since they had
no charge to bring, they enquired concerning His disciples, perhaps where they
were, and why He had collected them, and with what intention, and on what
terms. And this he said, as desiring to prove Him to be a seditious person and an
innovator, since no one gave heed to Him, except them alone, as though His
were some factory of wickedness. What then says Christ? To overthrow this, He
says,

John 18:20
"I spoke openly to the world, (not to the disciples privately,) I taught openly in
the temple."
"What then, said He nothing in secret?" He did, but not, as they thought,
from fear, and to make conspiracies, but if at any time His sayings were too high
for the hearing of the many.

John 18:21
"Why do you ask Me? Ask them which heard Me."
These are not the words of one speaking arrogantly, but of one confiding in
the truth of what He had said. What therefore He said at the beginning, "If I bear
witness of Myself, My witness is not true" [John 5:31], this He now implies,
desiring to render His testimony abundantly credible. For when Annas
mentioned the disciples, what says He? "Do you ask Me concerning Mine? Ask
Mine enemies, ask those who have plotted against Me, who have bound Me; let
them speak." This is an unquestionable proof of truth, when one calls his
enemies to be witnesses to what he says. What then does the high priest? When
it would have been right thus to have made the enquiry, that person did not so.