shows forth the greatness of His wrath: much more, who even suffered in the
flesh, these things are said of Christ. For since many men consider experience
the most reliable means of knowledge, he wishes to show that He that has
suffered knows what human nature suffers.
"Whence holy brethren" (he says "whence" instead of "for this cause"),
"partakers of an heavenly calling"— (seek nothing here, if you have been called
yonder— yonder is the reward, yonder the recompense. What then?) "Consider
the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to
Him that appointed Him, as also Moses [was faithful] in all His house." (What is
"who was faithful to Him that appointed Him?" it is, well disposed, protecting
what belongs to Him, not allowing them to be lightly carried away, "as also
Moses in all His house") that is, know who your High Priest is, and what He is,
and you will need no other consolation nor encouragement. Now he calls Him
"Apostle," on account of His having been "sent," and "high priest of our
profession," that is of the Faith. This One also was entrusted with a people, as
the other with the leadership of a people, but a greater one and upon higher
grounds.
"For a testimony of those things which shall be spoken." What do you
mean? Does God receive the witness of man? Yes, certainly. For if He call to
witness heaven and earth and hills (saying by the prophet, "Hear, O heaven, and
give ear, O earth, for the Lord has spoken" [Isaiah 1:2] — and "Hear ye ravines,
foundations of the earth, for the Lord has a controversy with His people" [Micah
6:2]), much more men; that is, that they may be witnesses, when themselves [the
Jews] shameless.

Hebrews 3:6
"But Christ as a Son." The one takes care of the property of others, but this
One of His own. "And the rejoicing of the hope." Well said he "of the hope." For
since the good things were all in hope, and yet we ought so "to hold it fast," as
even now to glory as for things which had already come to pass: for this cause he
says, "the rejoicing of the hope."
And adds, "let us hold it firm unto the end." [Romans 8:24] For "by hope we
are saved"; if therefore "we are saved by hope," and "are waiting with patience"
[Romans 8:25], let us not be grieved at present things, nor seek now those that
have been promised afterwards; "For" (he says) "hope which is seen is not
hope." For since the good things are great, we cannot receive them here in this
transitory life. With what object then did He even tell us of them beforehand,
when He was not about to give them here? In order that by the promise He might
refresh our souls, that by the engagement He might strengthen our zeal, that He
might anoint [preparing us for our contests] and stir up our mind. For this cause
then all these things were done.
6. Let us not then be troubled, let no man be troubled, when he sees the
wicked prospering. The recompense is not here, either of wickedness or of
virtue; and if in any instance there be either of wickedness or of virtue, yet is it
not according to desert, but merely as it were a taste of the judgment, that they
who believe not the resurrection may yet even by things that happen here be
brought to their senses. When then we see a wicked man rich, let us not be cast
down; when we see a good man suffering, let us not be troubled. For yonder are
the crowns, yonder the punishments.
Yea and in another point of view, it is not possible either that a bad man
should be altogether bad, but he may have some good things also: nor again that
a good man should be altogether good, but he may also have some sins. When