taking possession of it, by being covetous of it, by violently seizing it. And truly
there is need of violence. Wherefore? Because there are so many impediments,
as wives and children, cares and worldly business; besides those demons, and
him who is the ruler of them, the devil. There is need then of violence, there is
need of fortitude. He who takes by violence is exposed to toils. How? He
endures all things, he contends against necessities. How? He almost attempts
impossibilities. If such are those who take by violence, and we shrink from
attempting even what is possible, how shall we ever win? Or when shall we
enjoy the things for which we strive? "The violent," it is said, "take" the kingdom
of heaven "by force." Violence and rapacity are needed. For it is not simply set
before us, and ready to our hands. He who seizes by violence, is ever sober and
watchful, he is anxious and thoughtful, that he may make his seizure at a
seasonable time. Do you not see that in war he who is about to make a seizure
keeps watch and is under arms the whole night? If then they who aim at seizing
upon worldly goods, watch and are armed all the night long, should we, who
wish to seize upon spiritual things, sleep and snore in the day, and continue
always naked and unarmed? For he who is engaged in sin is unarmed; as he who
practices righteousness is armed. We do not fortify ourselves with almsgiving.
We do not prepare for ourselves lamps that are burning, we do not fence
ourselves in spiritual armor. We do not learn the way that leads there. We are not
sober and watchful, and therefore we can seize no spoil.
If a man wishes to make an attempt on a kingdom, does he not set death
before him in a thousand shapes? Is he not armed at all points, does he not
practice the art of war, does he not do everything with this view, and so rush on
to the attack? But we do not act thus. We wish to take the spoil while we are
sleeping, and therefore we come off with empty hands. Do you not see
plunderers, how they flee, how rapidly they move? How they force their way
through everything? And there is need of expedition here. The devil is in pursuit
of you. He orders those before to detain you. But if you are strong, if you are
watchful, you will spurn one, and thrust aside another, and escape from all, as a

bird. Yea, if you depart hence, if you escape from the market and the tumult, I
mean this life, and arrive at those higher regions beyond these, in the world to
come. For there, as in a solitude, there is no tumult, no one to disturb, or to stay
your course.
Have you seized? Yet a little exertion is needed after the seizure, that what
you have seized may not be taken from you. If we run on, if we look to none of
those things that are set before our eyes, if we consider nothing but how we may
escape from those who would hinder us, we shall be able to retain with all
security what we have seized. Have you seized on chastity? Tarry not; flee
beyond the reach of the devil. If he sees that he cannot overtake you, he will
cease to pursue; as we, when we can no longer see those who have robbed us,
despair of the pursuit, and do not pursue, nor call on others to stop thief, but
suffer them to escape. So do thou run vigorously at the beginning, and when you
are beyond the reach of the devil, he will not afterwards attack you, but you will
be in safety, securely enjoying those unspeakable blessings, which God grant
that we may all obtain through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, and worship, now and for ever, and
world without end. Amen.