This is the invocation addressed to Mary, the "loving Mother of the Redeemer," the
invocation addressed to Christ, who through Mary entered human history. Year alter year

the antiphon rises to Mary, evoking that moment which saw the accomplishment of this
essential historical transformation, which irreversibly continues: the transformation from
"falling" to "rising."

Mankind has made wonderful discoveries and achieved extraordinary results in the fields
of science and technology. It has made great advances along the path of progress and
civilization, and in recent times one could say that it has succeeded in speeding up the
pace of history. But the fundamental transformation, the one which can be called
"original," constantly accompanies man's journey, and through all the events of history
accompanies each and every individual. It is the transformation from "falling" to "rising,"
from death to life. It is also a constant challenge to people's consciences, a challenge to
man's whole historical awareness: the challenge to follow the path of "not falling" in
ways that are ever old and ever new, and of "rising again" if a fall has occurred.

As she goes forward with the whole of humanity towards the frontier between the two
Millennia, the Church, for her part, with the whole community of believers and in union
with all men and women of good will, takes up the great challenge contained in these
words of the Marian antiphon: "the people who have fallen yet strive to rise again," and
she addresses both the Redeemer and his Mother with the plea: "Assist us." For, as this
prayer attests, the Church sees the Blessed Mother of God in the saving mystery of Christ
and in her own mystery. She sees Mary deeply rooted in humanity's history, in man's
eternal vocation according to the providential plan which God has made for him from
eternity She sees Mary maternally present and sharing in the many complicated problems
which today beset the lives of individuals, families and nations; she sees her helping the
Christian people in the constant struggle between good and evil, to ensure that it "does
not fall," or, if it has fallen, that it "rises again."

I hope with all my heart that the reflections contained in the present Encyclical will also
serve to renew this vision in the hearts of all believers.

As Bishop of Rome, I send to all those to whom these thoughts are addressed the kiss of
peace, my greeting and my blessing in our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Given in Rome, at Saint Peter's, on March 25, the Solemnity of the Annunciation of the
Lord, in the year 1987, the ninth of my Pontificate.

JOHN PAUL II