much as the not remembering them that have sinned against us.
"Why? Did not God guard the other side also? Why? Did He not drive him
that has done the wrong to him that is wronged? Does He not send him from the
altar to the other, and so after the reconciliation invite him to the table?" But do
not therefore wait for the other to come, since thus you have lost all. For to this
intent most especially does He appoint unto you an unspeakable reward, that you
may prevent the other, since, if you are reconciled by his entreaties, the amity is
no longer the result of the divine command, but of the other party's diligence.
Wherefore also you go away uncrowned, while he receives the rewards.
What do you say? Have you an enemy, and are you not ashamed? Why is
not the devil enough for us, that we bring upon ourselves those of our own race
also? Would that not even he had been minded to war against us; would that not
even he were a devil!
Do you not know how great the pleasure after reconciliation? For what,
though in our enmity it appear not great? For that it is sweeter to love him that
does us wrong than to hate him, after the enmity is done away you shall be able
to learn full well.
5. Why then do we imitate the mad, devouring one another, warring against
our own flesh?
Hear even under the Old Testament, how great regard there was for this,
"The ways of revengeful men are unto death. One man keeps anger against
another, and does he seek healing of God?" [Sirach 28:3] "And yet He allowed,
'eye for eye,' and 'tooth for tooth,' how then does He find fault?" Because He
allowed even those things, not that we should do them one to another, but that
through the fear of suffering, we might abstain from the commission of crime.
And besides, those acts are the fruits of a short-lived anger, but to remember
injuries is the part of a soul that practises itself in evil.
But have you suffered evil? Yet nothing so great, as you will do to yourself
by remembering injuries. And besides, it is not so much as possible for a good
man to suffer any evil. For suppose there to be any man, having both children

and a wife, and let him practise virtue, and let him have moreover many
occasions of being injured, as well abundance of possessions, as sovereign
power, and many friends, and let him enjoy honor; only let him practise virtue,
for this must be added, and let us in supposition lay plagues upon him. And let
some wicked man come unto him, and involve him in losses. What then is that to
him who accounts money nothing? Let him kill his children. What this to him,
who learns to be wise touching the resurrection? Let him slay his wife; what is
this to him who is instructed not to sorrow for them that are fallen asleep? Let
him cast him into dishonor. What this to him who accounts the things present,
the flower of the grass? If you will, let him also torture his body, and cast him
into prison, what this to him that has learned, "Though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed;" and that "tribulation works approval?"
Now I had undertaken that he should receive no harm; but the account as it
proceeded has shown that he is even advantaged, being renewed, and becoming
approved.
Let us not then vex ourselves with others, injuring ourselves, and rendering
our soul weak. For the vexation is not so much from our neighbors' wickedness,
as from our weakness. Because of this, should any one insult us, we weep, and
frown; should any one rob us, we suffer the same like those little children, which
the more clever of their companions provoke for nothing, grieving them for
small causes; but nevertheless these too, if they should see them vexed, continue
to tease them, but if laughing, they on the contrary leave off. But we are more
foolish even than these, lamenting for these things, about which we ought to
laugh.
Wherefore I entreat, let us let go this childish mind, and lay hold of Heaven.
For indeed, Christ wills us to be men, perfect men. On this wise did Paul also
command, "Brethren, be not children in understanding," he says, "howbeit in
malice be ye children."
Let us therefore be children in malice, and flee wickedness, and lay hold on
virtue, that we may attain also to the good things eternal, by the grace and love