first, Proarche, there was produced, in the first and fifth place, Arche; from Anennoetos, in the
second and sixth place, Acataleptos; from Arrhetos, in the third and seventh place, Anonomastos;
and from Aoratos, in the fourth and eighth place, Agennetos. This is the Pleroma of the first Ogdoad.
They maintain that these powers were anterior to Bythus and Sige, that they may appear more
perfect than the perfect, and more knowing than the very Gnostics! To these persons one may justly
exclaim: "O ye trifling sophists!" since, even respecting Bythus himself, there are among them
many and discordant opinions. For some declare him to be without a consort, and neither male nor
female, and, in fact, nothing at all; while others affirm him to be masculo-feminine, assigning to
him the nature of a hermaphrodite; others, again, allot Sige to him as a spouse, that thus may be
formed the first conjunction.

### Chapter XII.—The doctrines of the followers of Ptolemy and Colorbasus.
1. But the followers of Ptolemy say that he [Bythus] has two consorts, which they also name
Diatheses (affections), viz., EnnÏa and Thelesis. For, as they affirm, he first conceived the thought
of producing something, and then willed to that effect. Wherefore, again, these two affections, or
powers, EnnÏa and Thelesis, having intercourse, as it were, between themselves, the production
of Monogenes and Aletheia took place according to conjunction. These two came forth as types
and images of the two affections of the Father,—visible representations of those that were
invisible,—Nous (i.e., Monogenes) of Thelesis, and Aletheia of EnnÏa, and accordingly the image
resulting from Thelesis was masculine, while that from EnnÏa was feminine. Thus Thelesis
(will) became, as it were, a faculty of EnnÏa (thought). For EnnÏa continually yearned after
offspring; but she could not of herself bring forth that which she desired. But when the power of
Thelesis (the faculty of will) came upon her, then she brought forth that on which she had brooded.
2. These fancied beings (like the Jove of Homer, who is represented as passing an anxious
sleepless night in devising plans for honouring Achilles and destroying numbers of the Greeks)
will not appear to you, my dear friend, to be possessed of greater knowledge than He who is the
God of the universe. He, as soon as He thinks, also performs what He has willed; and as soon as
He wills, also thinks that which He has willed; then thinking when He wills, and then willing when
1) does not so well agree with the Latin.

This sentence exists only in the Latin version, and we can give only a free translation.

He thinks, since He is all thought, [all will, all mind, all light,] all eye, all ear, the one entire
fountain of all good things.
3. Those of them, however, who are deemed more skilful than the persons who have just been
mentioned, say that the first Ogdoad was not produced gradually, so that one Æon was sent forth
by another, but that all the Æons were brought into existence at once by Propator and his EnnÏa.
He (Colorbasus) affirms this as confidently as if he had assisted at their birth. Accordingly, he and
his followers maintain that Anthropos and Ecclesia were not produced, as others hold, from
Logos and Zoe; but, on the contrary, Logos and Zoe from Anthropos and Ecclesia. But they express
this in another form, as follows: When the Propator conceived the thought of producing something,
he received the name of Father. But because what he did produce was true, it was named Aletheia.
Again, when he wished to reveal himself, this was termed Anthropos. Finally, when he produced
those whom he had previously thought of, these were named Ecclesia. Anthropos, by speaking,
formed Logos: this is the first-born son. But Zoe followed upon Logos; and thus the first Ogdoad
was completed.
4. They have much contention also among themselves respecting the Saviour. For some maintain
that he was formed out of all; wherefore also he was called Eudocetos, because the whole Pleroma
was well pleased through him to glorify the Father. But others assert that he was produced from
those ten Æons alone who sprung from Logos and Zoe, and that on this account he was called
Logos and Zoe, thus preserving the ancestral names. Others, again, affirm that he had his being
from those twelve Æons who were the offspring of Anthropos and Ecclesia; and on this account
he acknowledges himself the Son of man, as being a descendant of Anthropos. Others still, assert
that he was produced by Christ and the Holy Spirit, who were brought forth for the security of the
Pleroma; and that on this account he was called Christ, thus preserving the appellation of the Father,
by whom he was produced. And there are yet others among them who declare that the Propator of
the whole, Proarche, and Proanennoetos is called Anthropos; and that this is the great and abstruse
mystery, namely, that the Power which is above all others, and contains all in his embrace, is termed
Anthropos; hence does the Saviour style himself the "Son of man."