Reply to 2. As is evident in the beginning of the Metaphysics, the speculative sciences concern
things the knowledge of which is sought for their own sake. However, we do not seek to know
the things studied by logic for themselves, but as a help to the other sciences. So logic is not
included under speculative philosophy as a principal part but as something brought under
speculative philosophy as furnishing speculative thought with its instruments, namely,
syllogisms, definitions, and the like, which we need in the speculative sciences. Thus, according
to Boethius, logic is not so much a science as the instrument of science.

Reply to 3. The seven liberal arts do not adequately divide theoretical philosophy; but, as Hugh
of St. Victor says, seven arts are grouped together (leaving out certain other ones), because those
who wanted to learn philosophy were first instructed in them. And the reason why they are
divided into the trivium and quadrivium is that "they are as it were paths (viae) introducing the
quick mind to the secrets of philosophy." This is also in harmony with the Philosopher's
statement in the Metaphysics that we must investigate the method of scientific thinking before the

sciences themselves. And the Commentator says in the same place that before all the other
sciences a person should learn logic, which teaches the method of all the sciences; and the
trivium concerns logic. The Philosopher also says in the Ethics that the young can know
mathematics but not physics, because it requires experience. So we are given to understand that
after logic we should learn mathematics, which the quadrivium concerns. These, then, are like
paths leading the mind to the other philosophical disciplines. We may add that among the other
sciences these are called arts because they involve not only knowledge but also a work that is
directly a product of reason itself; for example, producing a composition, syllogism or discourse,
numbering, measuring, composing melodies, and reckoning the course of the stars. Other
sciences (such as divine and natural science) either do not involve a work produced but only
knowledge, and so we cannot call them arts, because, as the Metaphysics says, art is "productive
reason"; or they involve some bodily activity, as in the case of medicine, alchemy, and other
sciences of this kind. These latter, then, cannot be called liberal arts because such activity belongs
to man on the side of his nature in which he is not free, namely, on the side of his body. And
although moral science is directed to action, still that action is not the act of the science but rather
of virtue, as is clear in the Ethics. So we cannot call moral science an art; but rather in these
actions virtue takes the place of art. Thus, as Augustine says, the ancients defined virtue as the art
of noble and well-ordered living.