demons should not be able to look him in the face, and accounts those saints
happy for this, that they had such power. But let him hear Christ saying, "Rejoice
not because the demons are subject unto you" [Luke 10:20], because He knew
that all men rejoice most in this, through vainglory. For if you seek that which
pleases God, and that which is for the common good, there is another, a greater
way. It is not so great to free from a demon as it is to rescue from sin. A demon
hinders not to attain unto the kingdom of Heaven, nay, even cooperates,
unwillingly indeed, but nevertheless cooperates by making him that has the
demon more sober-minded; but sin casts a man out.
But it is likely some man will say, "God forbid it should ever befall me to
be sobered in this way!" Nor do I wish it for you, but a very different way, that
you should do all from love of Christ: if however, which God forbid, it should so
befall you, then even on this behalf I would comfort you. If then the demon does
not cast out (from the kingdom of heaven), but sin does cast out, to free a man
from sin is greater beneficence.
From this let us study to free our neighbors, and before our neighbors, our
own selves. Let us see to it, lest we have a demon: let us examine ourselves
strictly. More grievous than a demon is sin, for the demon makes men humble.
See ye not those possessed with a demon, when they have recovered from the
attack, how downcast they are, of how sad a countenance, how fraught with
shame their faces are, how they have not even courage to look one in the face?
See the strange inconsistency! While those are ashamed on account of the things
they suffer, we are not ashamed on account of the things we do; while they are
abashed being wronged, we are not abashed when doing wrong: and yet their
condition is not a subject for shame, but for pity and tenderness and indulgence:
nay, great is the admiration it calls for, and many the praises, when struggling
against such a spirit, they bear all thankfully: whereas our condition in very deed
is a subject for ridicule, for shame, for accusation, for correction, for
punishment, for the worst of evils, for hell-fire; calling for no compassion
whatever. Do you see, that worse than a demon is sin? And those indeed, from

the ills they suffer, reap a double profit: first, their being sobered and brought to
more self-control; then, that having suffered here the chastisement of their own
sins, they depart hence to their Master, purified. For indeed upon this we have
often discoursed to you, that those who are punished here, if they bear it
thankfully, may naturally be supposed to put away thereby many of their sins.
Whereas from sins the mischief resulting is twofold; first, that we offend;
secondly, that we become worse. Attend to what I say. Not this is the only injury
we get from sin, that we commit a sin: but another and a worse is this, that our
soul receives a habit. Just as it is in the case of the body— for it will be more
plain when put in the form of an example— as he who has taken a fever has got
harm not only in this respect, that he is sick, but also that after the sickness he
has become weaker, even though he may return to health after a long disease:
just so in the case of sin, though we may regain health, yet we are far from
having the strength we need. For take the case of one who has been insolently
abusive: does he not suffer his deserts for his abusive conduct? Aye, but there is
another and a worse thing to rue (which is), that his soul has become more
insensible to shame. For from each several sin that is committed, even after the
sin has been done and has ceased, there remains a kind of venom instilled into
our souls. Do you not hear people saying, when they are recovered from
sickness, "I dare not drink water now?" And yet the man has regained his health:
aye, but the disease has done him this harm also. And whereas those (possessed)
persons, albeit suffering ill, are thankful, we, when faring well, blaspheme God,
and think ourselves very ill used: for you will find more persons behaving thus
in health and wealth than in poverty and sickness. For there stands the demon
over (the possessed), like a very hangman, fierce, uttering many (menaces), even
as a schoolmaster brandishing the lash, and not suffering them to give way to
any laxity. And suppose that some are not at all brought to a sober mind, neither
are these liable to punishment; no small thing this: even as fools, even as
madmen and children, are not called to account, so neither are these: since for
things that are done in a state of unconsciousness, none can be so merciless as to