death even with the departed, with those who are asleep, who are already
crowned, who want for nothing. For hear Paul saying, "Partaking in the
memories of the Saints." And how may this be done? When you admire a man,
when you do any of those acts for which he was crowned, you are evidently a
sharer in his labors, and in his crowns.
"The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day."
He had compassion on me, he says, he shall therefore have the like return in that
terrible Day, when we shall have need of much mercy. "The Lord grant him to
find mercy from the Lord." Are there two Lords then? By no means. But "to us
there is one Lord Christ Jesus, and one God." [1 Corinthians 8:6] Here those
who are infected with the heresy of Marcion assail this expression; but let them
learn that this mode of speech is not uncommon in Scripture; as when it is said,
"The Lord said unto my Lord" [Psalm 110:1]; and again, "I said unto the Lord,
You are my Lord" [Psalm 16:2]; and, "The Lord rained fire from the Lord."
[Genesis 19:24] This indicates that the Persons are of the same substance, not
that there is a distinction of nature. For we are not to understand that there are
two substances differing from each other, but two Persons, each being of the
same substance.
Observe too, that he says, "The Lord grant him mercy." For as he himself
had obtained mercy from Onesiphorus, so he wished him to obtain the same
from God. Moral. And if Onesiphorus, who exposed himself to danger, is saved
by mercy, much more are we also saved by the same. For terrible indeed, terrible
is that account, and such as needs great love for mankind, that we may not hear
that awful sentence, "Depart from me...I never knew you, you that work iniquity"
[Matthew 7:23]; or that fearful word, "Depart, you cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels" [Matthew 25:40]: that we may not hear,
"Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed" [Luke 16:16]: that we may not
hear that voice full of horror, "Take him away, and cast him into outer darkness":
that we may not hear those words full of terror, "Thou wicked and slothful
servant." [Matthew 22:13 and 25:26] For awful truly and terrible is that tribunal.

And yet God is gracious and merciful. He is called a God "of mercies and a God
of comfort" [2 Corinthians 1:3]; good as none else is good, and kind, and gentle,
and full of pity, Who "wills not the death of a sinner, but that he should be
converted and live." [Ezekiel 18:24; 33:11] Whence then, whence is that Day so
full of agony and anguish? A stream of fire is rolling before His face. The books
of our deeds are opened. The day itself is burning as an oven, the angels are
flying around, and many furnaces are prepared. How then is He good and
merciful, and full of lovingkindness to man? Even herein is He merciful, and He
shows in these things the greatness of His lovingkindness. For He holds forth to
us these terrors, that being constrained by them, we may be awakened to the
desire of the kingdom.
And observe how, besides commending Onesiphorus, he specifies his
kindness, "he oft refreshed me"; like a wearied wrestler overcome by heat, he
refreshed and strengthened him in his tribulations. And in how many things he
ministered to me at Ephesus, you know very well. Not only at Ephesus, but here
also he refreshed me. For such ought to be the conduct of one on the watch and
awakened to good actions, not to work once, or twice, or thrice, but through the
whole of life. For as our body is not fed once for all, and so provided with
sustenance for a whole life, but needs also daily food, so in this too, godliness
requires to be supported every day by good works. For we ourselves have need
of great mercy. It is on account of our sins that God, the Friend of man, does all
these things, not that He needs them Himself, but He does all for us. For
therefore it is that He has revealed them all, and made them known to us, and not
merely told us of them, but given us assurance of them by what He has done.
Though He was worthy of credit upon His word only, that no one may think it is
said hyperbolically, or in the way of threatening merely, we have further
assurance by His works. How? By the punishments which He has inflicted both
publicly and privately. And that you may learn by the very examples, at one time
he punished Pharaoh, at another time He brought a flood of water upon the earth,
and that utter destruction, and again at another time a flood of fire: and even now