FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.5.

something pleasant.
Reply to Objection 2: Sad things, called to mind, cause pleasure, not
in so far as they are sad and contrary to pleasant things; but in so far
as man is delivered from them. In like manner the recollection of
pleasant things, by reason of these being lost, may cause sadness.
Reply to Objection 3: Hatred also can be the accidental cause of
love: i.e. so far as some love one another, inasmuch as they agree in
hating one and the same thing.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the actions of others are a cause of

pleasure to us?
Objection 1: It would seem that the actions of others are not a cause
of pleasure to us. Because the cause of pleasure is our own good
when conjoined to us. But the actions of others are not conjoined to
us. Therefore they are not a cause of pleasure to us.
Objection 2: Further, the action is the agent's own good. If, therefore,
the actions of others are a cause of pleasure to us, for the same
reason all goods belonging to others will be pleasing to us: which is
evidently untrue.
Objection 3: Further, action is pleasant through proceeding from an
innate habit; hence it is stated in Ethic. ii, 3 that "we must reckon the
pleasure which follows after action, as being the sign of a habit
existing in us." But the actions of others do not proceed from habits
existing in us, but, sometimes, from habits existing in the agents.
Therefore the actions of others are not pleasing to us, but to the
agents themselves.
On the contrary, It is written in the second canonical epistle of John
(verse 4): "I was exceeding glad that I found thy children walking in
truth."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1; Question 31, Article 1), two
things are requisite for pleasure, namely, the attainment of one's
proper good, and the knowledge of having obtained it. Wherefore the
action of another may cause pleasure to us in three ways. First, from
the fact that we obtain some good through the action of another. And
in this way, the actions of those who do some good to us, are
pleasing to us: since it is pleasant to be benefited by another.
Secondly, from the fact that another's action makes us to know or
appreciate our own good: and for this reason men take pleasure in
being praised or honored by others, because, to wit, they thus
become aware of some good existing in themselves. And since this
appreciation receives greater weight from the testimony of good and
wise men, hence men take greater pleasure in being praised and
honored by them. And because a flatterer appears to praise,
therefore flattery is pleasing to some. And as love is for something
good, while admiration is for something great, so it is pleasant to be

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.6.