"Whether in pretense or in truth Christ is preached." [Philippians 1:18]. In the
same spirit Moses answered, when some would have excited his displeasure
against Eldad and Modad, because they prophesied, "Do you envy for my sake?
Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets!" [Numbers 11:29] These
jealous feelings proceed from vainglory; and are they not those of opponents and
enemies? Does any one speak ill of you? Love him! It is impossible, you say.
Nay, if you will, it is quite possible. For if you love him only who speaks well of
you, what thanks have you? It is not for the Lord's sake, but for the sake of the
man's kind speech that you do it. Has any one injured you? Do him good! For in
benefiting him who has benefited you there is little merit. Have you been deeply
wronged and suffered loss? Make a point of requiting it with the contrary. Yes, I
entreat you. Let this be the way we do our own part. Let us cease from hating
and injuring our enemies. He commands us "to love our enemies" [Matthew
5:44]: but we persecute Him while He loves us. God forbid! We all say in words,
but not so in deeds. So darkened are our minds by sin, that we tolerate in our
actions what in words we think intolerable. Let us desist then from things that
are injurious and ruinous to our salvation, that we may obtain those blessings
which as His friends we may obtain. For Christ says, "I will that where I am,
there My disciples may be also, that they may behold My glory" [John 17:24],
which may we all attain, through the grace and love of Jesus Christ.

## Homily 4 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 1:15, 16
"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit for this cause
I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all longsuffering,
for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe in Him to life everlasting."
The favors of God so far exceed human hope and expectation, that often
they are not believed. For God has bestowed upon us such things as the mind of
man never looked for, never thought of. It is for this reason that the Apostles
spend much discourse in securing a belief of the gifts that are granted us of God.
For as men, upon receiving some great good, ask themselves if it is not a dream,
as not believing it; so it is with respect to the gifts of God. What then was it that
was thought incredible? That those who were enemies, and sinners, neither
justified by the law, nor by works, should immediately through faith alone be
advanced to the highest favor. Upon this head accordingly Paul has discoursed at
length in his Epistle to the Romans, and here again at length. "This is a faithful
saying," he says, "and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners."
As the Jews were chiefly attracted by this, he persuades them not to give
heed to the law, since they could not attain salvation by it without faith. Against
this he contends; for it seemed to them incredible, that a man who had mis-spent
all his former life in vain and wicked actions, should afterwards be saved by his
faith alone. On this account he says, "It is a saying to be believed." But some not
only disbelieved but even objected, as the Greeks do now. "Let us then do evil,
that good may come." This was the consequence they drew in derision of our
faith, from his words, "Where sin abounded grace did much more abound."
[Romans 3:8, and 5:20] So when we discourse to them of Hell they say, How