us, if all men approve, and the Lord be offended; neither is there any danger,
though all shun and hate us, if with God we have acceptance and love. For that
which is verily grace, and verily peace, comes of God, since he who finds grace
in God's sight, though he suffer ten thousand horrors, fears no one; I say not
only, no man, but not even the devil himself; but he that has offended God
suspects all men, though he seem to be in security. For human nature is unstable,
and not friends only and brethren, but fathers also, before now, have been
altogether changed and often for a little thing he whom they begot, the branch of
their planting, has been to them, more than all foes, an object of persecution.
Children, too, have cast off their fathers. Thus, if you will mark it, David was in
favor with God, Absalom was in favor with men. What was the end of each, and
which of them gained most honor, you know. Abraham was in favor with God,
Pharaoh with men; for to gratify him they gave up the just man's wife. [See St.
John Chrysostom on Genesis 12:17] Which then of the two was the more
illustrious, and the happy man? Every one knows. And why speak I of righteous
men; The Israelites were in favor with God, but they were hated by men, the
Egyptians; but nevertheless they prevailed against their haters and vanquished
them, with how great triumph, is well known to you all.
For this, therefore, let all of us labor earnestly; whether one be a slave, let
him pray for this, that he may find grace with God rather than with his master; or
a wife, let her seek grace from God her Saviour rather than from her husband; or
a soldier, in preference to his king and commander let him seek that favor which
comes from above. For thus among men also will you be an object of love.
4. But how shall a man find grace with God? How else, except by lowliness
of mind? For God, says one, [James 4:6] "resists the proud, but gives grace unto
the humble; and, [Psalm 51:17. τεταπεινωμένην] the sacrifice of God is a broken
spirit, and a heart that is brought low God will not despise." For if with men
humility is so lovely, much more with God. Thus both they of the Gentiles found
grace and the Jews no other way fell from grace; [Romans 10:13] "for they were
not subject unto the righteousness of God." The lowly man of whom I am

speaking, is pleasing and delightful to all men, and dwells in continual peace,
and has in him no ground for contentions. For though you insult him, though you
abuse him, whatsoever you say, he will be silent and will bear it meekly, and will
have so great peace towards all men as one cannot even describe. Yea, and with
God also. For the commandments of God are to be at peace with men: and thus
our whole life is made prosperous, through peace one with another. For no man
can injure God: His nature is imperishable, and above all suffering. Nothing
makes the Christian so admirable as lowliness of mind. Hear, for instance,
Abraham saying, [Genesis 18:27] "But I am but dust and ashes;" and again, God
[saying] of Moses, that [Numbers 12:3] "he was the meekest of all men." For
nothing was ever more humble than he; who, being leader of so great a people,
and having overwhelmed in the sea the king and the host of all the Egyptians, as
if they had been flies; and having wrought so many wonders both in Egypt and
by the Red Sea and in the wilderness, and received such high testimony, yet felt
exactly as if he had been an ordinary person, and as a son-in-law was humbler
than his father-in-law, [Exodus 18:24] and took advice from him, and was not
indignant, nor did he say, "What is this? After such and so great achievements,
are you come to us with your counsel?" This is what most people feel; though a
man bring the best advice, despising it, because of the lowliness of the person.
But not so did he: rather through lowliness of mind he wrought all things well.
Hence also he despised the courts of kings, [Hebrews 11:24-26] since he was
lowly indeed: for the sound mind and the high spirit are the fruit of humility. For
of how great nobleness and magnanimity, do you think, was it a token, to despise
the kingly palace and table? Since kings among the Egyptians are honored as
gods, and enjoy wealth and treasures inexhaustible. But nevertheless, letting go
all these and throwing away the very sceptres of Egypt, he hastened to join
himself unto captives, and men worn down with toil, whose strength was spent
in the clay and the making of bricks, men whom his own slaves abhorred, (for,
says he [ἐβδελύσσοντο], Septuagint. Exodus 1:2 "The Egyptians abhorred
them;") unto these he ran and preferred them before their masters. From whence