([συγκρίσεως]) the victory appears, the sorcery being worsted. Everywhere,
vainglory and love of power are a (fruitful) source of evils! "But Saul, who is
also Paul,"— [Acts 13:9] here his name is changed at the same time that he is
ordained, as it was in Peter's case, — "filled with the Holy Ghost, looked upon
him, and said, O full of all guile and all villany, thou child of the devil:" [Acts
13:10] and observe, this is not abuse, but accusation: for so ought forward,
impudent people to be rebuked "thou enemy of all righteousness;" here he lays
bare what was in the thoughts of the man, while under pretext of saving he was
ruining the proconsul: "will you not cease," he says, "to pervert the ways of the
Lord?" (He says it) both confidently ([αξιοπίστως]), It is not with us you are
warring, nor are you fighting (with us), but "the ways of the Lord" you are
perverting, and with praise (of these, he adds) "the right" ways. "And now,
behold, the hand of the Lord is upon you, and you shall be blind." [Acts 13:11] It
was the sign by which he was himself converted, and by this he would fain
convert this man. As also that expression, "for a season," puts it not as an act of
punishing, but as meant for his conversion: had it been for punishment, he would
have made him lastingly blind, but now it is not so, but "for a season" (and this),
that he may gain the proconsul. For, as he was prepossessed by the sorcery, it
was well to teach him a lesson by this infliction (and the sorcerer also), in the
same way as the magicians (in Egypt) were taught by the boils. [Exodus 9:11]
"And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness: and he went about
seeking some to lead him by the hand. Then the deputy, when he saw what was
done, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord." [Acts 13:12] But
observe, how they do not linger there, as (they might have been tempted to do)
now that the proconsul was a believer, nor are enervated by being courted and
honored, but immediately keep on with their work, and set out for the country on
the opposite coast. "Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, they
came to Perga in Pamphylia; and John departing from them returned to
Jerusalem. But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia,
and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down." (v. 13, 14.) And

here again they entered the synagogues, in the character of Jews, that they might
not be treated as enemies, and be driven away: and in this way they carried the
whole matter successfully. "And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets,
the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, You men and brethren, if you
have any word of exhortation for the people, say on." [Acts 13:15] From this
point, we learn the history of Paul's doings, as in what was said above we have
learned not a little about Peter. But let us review what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "And when they had come to Salamis," the metropolis of
Cyprus, "they preached the word of God." [Acts 13:5] They had spent a year in
Antioch: it behooved that they should go hither also (to Cyprus) and not sit
permanently where they were (the converts in Cyprus): needed greater teachers.
See too how they remain no time in Seleucia, knowing that (the people there)
might have reaped much benefit from the neighboring city (of Antioch): but they
hasten on to the more pressing duties. When they came to the metropolis of the
island, they were earnest to disabuse ([διορθωσαι]) the proconsul. But that it is
no flattery that (the writer) says, "he was with the proconsul, a prudent man"
[Acts 13:7], you may learn from the facts; for he needed not many discourses,
and himself wished to hear them. And he mentions also the names. * * *
Observe, how he said nothing to the sorcerer, until he gave him an occasion: but
they only "preached the word of the Lord." Since (though Elymas) saw the rest
attending to them, he looked only to this one object, that the proconsul might not
be won over. Why did not (Paul) perform some other miracle? Because there
was none equal to this, the taking the enemy captive. And observe, he first
impeaches, and then punishes, him. He shows how justly the man deserved to
suffer, by his saying, "O full of all deceit" [Acts 13:10]: ("full of all,") he says:
nothing wanting to the full measure: and he well says, of all "deceit," for the
man was playing the part of a hypocrite.— "Child of the devil," because he was
doing his work: "enemy of all righteousness," since this (which they preached)
was the whole of righteousness (though at the same time): I suppose in these
words he reproves his manner of life. His words were not prompted by anger,