praiseworthy inasmuch as it is done under vow, even though the doer of it does not take
so much delight in his abstinence, or continence: that deficiency is made up by his
taking delight in a higher virtue, which is religion.
If any one does anything for God, he offers the act to God, such as it is: but if he does it
under a vow, he offers to God not only the act but also the power: thus he clearly has
the intention of rendering to God some greater service. Therefore his act will be the
more virtuous by reason of the greater good intended, even though another shows
himself more fervent in the execution.
Moreover, the will that goes before a deed, virtually endures throughout the whole
course of the doing of it; and renders it praiseworthy, even when the agent in the
execution of his work is not thinking of the purpose for which he began: for it is not
necessary for him who has undertaken a journey for God's sake, to be actually thinking
of God at every step of the journey. But clearly he who has vowed to do a thing has
willed it more intensely than another who simply has a purpose of doing it; because he
has not only willed to do it, but also has willed to fortify himself against failing to do it.
This original earnestness of will renders the fulfilment of the vow, with more or less of
earnestness, praiseworthy, even when the will is not actually fixed on the work, or is
fixed on it but languidly. Thus what is done under vow is more praiseworthy than what is
done without vow, other conditions however being equal.

## CHAPTER CXL--That neither all Good Works nor all Sins are Equal

whether the trespasser has overstepped it little or much; or as a boxer is cast, once he
has gone outside the limits of the ring, little or much: so then, once a man has
overstepped the bounds of reason, the amount of his transgression makes no
difference. On careful consideration, however, it appears that in all cases where
perfection and goodness consists in a certain conformity to measure, the evil will be the
greater, the greater the departure from that due conformity. Thus health consists in a
due blending of humours, and beauty in a due proportion of features and limbs, and
truth in a conformity of thought or speech to fact. The greater the unevenness of
humours, the greater the sickness: the greater the incongruity of features or limbs, the
greater the ugliness; and the greater the departure from truth, the greater the falsehood:
thus the reckoning is not so false that brings in 5 for 3 as that which brings in 100 for 3.
But the good of virtue consists in a certain conformity to measure: for virtue is a mean,
according to due limitation under the circumstances, between contrary vices.
Wickedness then is greater, the further it is out of this harmony. Nor is transgressing the
limits of virtue like transgressing bounds fixed by a court. For virtue being of itself good,
the transgression of it is of itself evil; and therefore the greater the departure from virtue,
the greater the evil. But the transgression of a limit fixed by a court is not of itself evil,
but only accidentally so, inasmuch as it is forbidden. But in these accidental connexions,
though the being of one thing at all follows upon another's being at all, it does not follow
that the being of the one thing in a higher degree follows upon the other's coming to be
in a higher degree. Thus if a white body is musical, it does not follow that the whiter the
body, the more musical: but it does follow that if whiteness is distinctive of vision, a
stronger whiteness wilt be more distinctive.
A noteworthy difference between sins is that between mortal and venial sin. A mortal sin
is one that deprives the soul of spiritual life. The essence of spiritual life consists in two
things, according to the likeness of natural life. Just as the body lives naturally by its
union with the soul, which is the principle of life; and again, quickened by the soul, the
body moves of itself, while a dead body either remains immovable, or is moved only by
an exterior power: so is man's will alive, when conjoined by a right intention with
its last end, which is its object and, as it were, its form; and in thus cleaving by love to
God and to its neighbour, it is moved by an interior principle of action. But when a right
intention of the last end and love is gone, the soul is, as it were, dead, and no longer
moves of itself to do any right actions, but either wholly gives over doing them, or is led
to do them only by an exterior principle, to wit, the fear of punishment. Whatever
sins therefore stand not with a right intention of the last end and love, are mortal sins:
but, so long as these finalities are attended to, any deficiency in point of right order of
reason will not be a mortal sin, but venial.