for this. For by this is signified that the Church takes her origin from
Christ. Wherefore the Apostle says (Eph. 5:32): "This is a great
sacrament; but I speak in Christ and in the Church."
Reply to Objection 1:is clear from the foregoing.
Reply to Objection 2: Matter is that from which something is made.
Now created nature has a determinate principle; and since it is
determined to one thing, it has also a determinate mode of
proceeding. Wherefore from determinate matter it produces
something in a determinate species. On the other hand, the Divine
Power, being infinite, can produce things of the same species out of
any matter, such as a man from the slime of the earth, and a woman
from out of man.
Reply to Objection 3: A certain affinity arises from natural
generation, and this is an impediment to matrimony. Woman,
however, was not produced from man by natural generation, but by
the Divine Power alone. Wherefore Eve is not called the daughter of
Adam; and so this argument does not prove.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the woman was fittingly made from the

rib of man?
Objection 1: It would seem that the woman should not have been
formed from the rib of man. For the rib was much smaller than the
woman's body. Now from a smaller thing a larger thing can be made
only---either by addition (and then the woman ought to have been
described as made out of that which was added, rather than out of
the rib itself)---or by rarefaction, because, as Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. x): "A body cannot increase in bulk except by rarefaction." But
the woman's body is not more rarefied than man's---at least, not in
the proportion of a rib to Eve's body. Therefore Eve was not formed
from a rib of Adam.
Objection 2: Further, in those things which were first created there
was nothing superfluous. Therefore a rib of Adam belonged to the
integrity of his body. So, if a rib was removed, his body remained
imperfect; which is unreasonable to suppose.
Objection 3: Further, a rib cannot be removed from man without
pain. But there was no pain before sin. Therefore it was not right for
a rib to be taken from the man, that Eve might be made from it.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 2:22): "God built the rib, which He
took from Adam, into a woman."
I answer that, It was right for the woman to be made from a rib of
man. First, to signify the social union of man and woman, for the
woman should neither "use authority over man," and so she was not
made from his head; nor was it right for her to be subject to man's
contempt as his slave, and so she was not made from his feet.
Secondly, for the sacramental signification; for from the side of
Christ sleeping on the Cross the Sacraments flowed---namely, blood
and water---on which the Church was established.
Reply to Objection 1: Some say that the woman's body was formed
by a material increase, without anything being added; in the same
way as our Lord multiplied the five loaves. But this is quite
impossible. For such an increase of matter would either be by a
change of the very substance of the matter itself, or by a change of
its dimensions. Not by change of the substance of the matter, both