As ye affirm that Christ was generated after the rest, and yet declare that he was produced perfect,
much more then should Logos, who is anterior to him in age, be produced by the same Nous,
unquestionably perfect, and not blind; nor could he, again, have produced Æons still blinder than
himself, until at last your Sophia, always utterly blinded, gave birth to so vast a body of evils. And
your Father is the cause of all this mischief; for ye declare the magnitude and power of your Father
to be the causes of ignorance, assimilating Him to Bythus, and assigning this as a name to Him
who is the unnameable Father. But if ignorance is an evil, and ye declare all evils to have derived
their strength from it, while ye maintain that the greatness and power of the Father is the cause of
this ignorance, ye do thus set Him forth as the author of [all] evils. For ye state as the cause of evil
this fact, that [no one] could contemplate His greatness. But if it was really impossible for the Father
to make Himself known from the beginning to those [beings] that were formed by Him, He must
in that case be held free from blame, inasmuch as He could not remove the ignorance of those who
came after Him. But if, at a subsequent period, when He so willed it, He could take away that
ignorance which had increased with the successive productions as they followed each other, and
thus become deeply seated in the Æons, much more, had He so willed it might He formerly have
prevented that ignorance, which as yet was not, from coming into existence.
11. Since therefore, as soon as He so pleased, He did become known not only to the Æons, but
also to these men who lived in these latter times; but, as He did not so please to be known from the
beginning, He remained unknown—the cause of ignorance is, according to you, the will of the
Father. For if He foreknew that these things would in future happen in such a manner, why then
did He not guard against the ignorance of these beings before it had obtained a place among them,
rather than afterwards, as if under the influence of repentance, deal with it through the production
of Christ? For the knowledge which through Christ He conveyed to all, He might long before have
imparted through Logos, who was also the first-begotten of Monogenes. Or if, knowing them
beforehand, He willed that these things should happen [as they have done], then the works of
ignorance must endure for ever, and never pass away. For the things which have been made in
accordance with the will of your Propator must continue along with the will of Him who willed
them; or if they pass away, the will of Him also who decreed that they should have a being will
pass away along with them. And why did the Æons find rest and attain perfect knowledge through
learning [at last] that the Father is altogether incomprehensible? They might surely have possessed
this knowledge before they became involved in passion; for the greatness of the Father did not
suffer diminution from the beginning, so that these might know that He was altogether
incomprehensible. For if, on account of His infinite greatness, He remained unknown, He ought
remarks that -.& )%*".& would have been better, and proposes to read "progenitum" in the Latin; but we do not see any necessity
for change.