SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.3.

short of regnative prudence, retains the common name of political
prudence, even as in logic a convertible term which does not denote
the essence of a thing retains the name of "proper."
Reply to Objection 2: A different aspect of the object diversifies the
species of a habit, as stated above (Question 47, Article 5). Now the
same actions are considered by the king, but under a more general
aspect, as by his subjects who obey: since many obey one king in
various departments. Hence regnative prudence is compared to this
political prudence of which we are speaking, as mastercraft to
handicraft.
Reply to Objection 3: Man directs himself by prudence commonly so
called, in relation to his own good, but by political prudence, of
which we speak, he directs himself in relation to the common good.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a part of prudence should be reckoned to

be domestic?
Objection 1: It would seem that domestic should not be reckoned a
part of prudence. For, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5)
"prudence is directed to a good life in general": whereas domestic
prudence is directed to a particular end, viz. wealth, according to
Ethic. i, 1. Therefore a species of prudence is not domestic.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Question 47, Article 13)
prudence is only in good people. But domestic prudence may be
also in wicked people, since many sinners are provident in
governing their household. Therefore domestic prudence should not
be reckoned a species of prudence.
Objection 3: Further, just as in a kingdom there is a ruler and
subject, so also is there in a household. If therefore domestic like
political is a species of prudence, there should be a paternal
corresponding to regnative prudence. Now there is no such
prudence. Therefore neither should domestic prudence be
accounted a species of prudence.
On the contrary, The Philosopher states (Ethic. vi, 8) that there are
various kinds of prudence in the government of a multitude, "one of
which is domestic, another legislative, and another political."
I answer that, Different aspects of an object, in respect of
universality and particularity, or of totality and partiality, diversify
arts and virtues; and in respect of such diversity one act of virtue is
principal as compared with another. Now it is evident that a
household is a mean between the individual and the city or kingdom,
since just as the individual is part of the household, so is the
household part of the city or kingdom. And therefore, just as
prudence commonly so called which governs the individual, is
distinct from political prudence, so must domestic prudence be
distinct from both.
Reply to Objection 1: Riches are compared to domestic prudence,
not as its last end, but as its instrument, as stated in Polit. i, 3. On
the other hand, the end of political prudence is "a good life in
general" as regards the conduct of the household. In Ethic. i, 1 the