σώματος κατὰ μέρος πορθουμένου]; [τῆς] [κεφαλῆς];) member by member? Or
his head? Who, while his bones were forced out by levers? ([ἀναμοχλευομένων])
Who, while placed without intermission upon frying-pans? Who, when thrown
into a caldron? Show me these instances. For to die by hemlock is all as one with
a man's continuing in a state of sleep. Nay even sweeter than sleep is this sort of
death, if report say true. But if certain [of them] did endure torments, yet of
these, too, the praise is gone to nothing. For on some disgraceful occasion they
perished; some for revealing mysteries; some for aspiring to dominion; others
detected in the foulest crimes; others again rashly, and fruitlessly, and foolishly,
there being no reason for it, made away with themselves. But not so with us.
Wherefore of the deeds of those nothing is said; but these flourish and daily
increase. Which Paul having in mind said, "The weakness of God is stronger
than all men."
8. For that the Gospel is divine, even from hence is evident; namely,
whence could it have occurred to twelve ignorant men to attempt such great
things? Who sojourned in marshes, in rivers, in deserts; who never at any time
perhaps had entered into a city nor into a forum;— whence did it occur, to set
themselves in array against the whole world? For that they were timid and
unmanly, he shows who wrote of them, not apologizing, nor enduring to throw
their failings into the shade: which indeed of itself is a very great token of the
truth. What then does he say about them? That when Christ was apprehended,
after ten thousand wonders, they fled; and he who remained, being the leader of
the rest, denied. Whence was it then that they who when Christ was alive
endured not the attack of the Jews; now that He was dead and buried, and as you
say, had not risen again, nor had any talk with them, nor infused courage into
them— whence did they set themselves in array against so great a world? Would
they not have said among themselves, "what means this? Himself He was not
able to save, and will He protect us? Himself He defended not when alive, and
will He stretch out the hand unto us now that he is dead? Himself, when alive,
subdued not even one nation; and are we to convince the whole world by

uttering His Name?" How, I ask, could all this be reasonable, I will not say, as
something to be done, but even as something to be imagined? From whence it is
plain that had they not seen Him after He was risen, and received most ample
proof of his power, they would not have ventured so great a cast.
9. For suppose they had possessed friends innumerable; would they not
presently have made them all enemies, disturbing ancient customs, and removing
their father's landmarks? ([ὅρια] Ms. Reg. [ἔθη] Ben.) But as it was, they had
them for enemies, all, both their own countrymen and foreigners. For although
they had been recommended to veneration by everything external, would not all
men have abhorred them, introducing a new polity? But now they were even
destitute of everything; and it was likely that even on that account all would hate
and scorn them at once. For whom will you name? The Jews? Nay, they had
against them an inexpressible hatred on account of the things which had been
done unto the Master. The Greeks then? Why, first of all, these had rejected one
not inferior to them; and no man knew this so well as the Greeks. For Plato, who
wished to strike out a new form of government, or rather a part of government;
and that not by changing the customs relating to the gods, but merely by
substituting one line of conduct for another; was cast out of Sicily, and went near
to lose his life. This however did not ensue: so that he lost his liberty alone. And
had not a certain Barbarian been more gentle than the tyrant of Sicily, nothing
could have rescued the philosopher from slavery throughout life in a foreign
land. And yet it is not all one to innovate in affairs of the kingdom, and in
matters of religious worship. For the latter more than any thing else causes
disturbance and troubles men. For to say, "let such and such an one marry such a
woman, and let the guardians [of the commonwealth] exercise their
guardianship so and so," is not enough to cause any great disturbance: and
especially when all this is lodged in a book, and no great anxiety on the part of
the legislator to carry the proposals into practice. On the other hand, to say, "they
be no gods which men worship, but demons; He who was crucified is God;" ye
well know how great wrath it kindled, how severely men must have paid for it,