us suppose that the man who is temperate, and he who rightly performs the other
virtues, has no need of labor, but that they do all things in their sleep, still how
should we have employed our ease? Would it not have been for pride and
boastfulness? "But wherefore," says some one, "has great pleasure been attached
to vice, great labor and toil to virtue?" Why, what thanks would you have had,
and for what would you have received a reward, if the matter had not been one
of difficulty? Even now I can show you many who naturally hate intercourse
with women, and avoid conversation with them as impure; shall we then call
these chaste, shall we crown these, tell me, and proclaim them victors? By no
means. Chastity is self-restraint, and the mastering pleasures which fight, just as
in war the trophies are most honorable when the contest is violent, not when no
one raises a hand against us. Many are by their very nature passionless; shall we
call these good tempered? Not at all. And so the Lord after naming three
manners of the eunuch state, leaves two of them uncrowned, and admits one into
the kingdom of heaven. [Matthew 19:12] "But what need," says one, "was there
of wickedness?" I say this too. "What is it then which made wickedness to be?"
What but our willful negligence? "But," says one, "there ought to be only good
men." Well, what is proper to the good man? Is it to watch and be sober, or to
sleep and snore? "And why," says one, "seemed it not good that a man should act
rightly without laboring?" You speak words which become the cattle or gluttons,
or who make their belly their god. For to prove that these are the words of folly,
answer me this. Suppose there were a king and a general, and while the king was
asleep or drunk, the general should endure hardship and erect a trophy, whose
would you count the victory to be? Who would enjoy the pleasure of what was
done? Do you see that the soul is more especially disposed towards those things
for which she has labored? And therefore God has joined labors to virtue,
wishing to make us attached to her. For this cause we admire virtue, even
although we act not rightly ourselves, while we condemn vice even though it be
very pleasant. And if you say, "Why do we not admire those who are good by
nature more than those who are so by choice?" we reply, Because it is just to

prefer him that labors to him that labors not. For why is it that we labor? It is
because thou did not bear with moderation the not laboring. Nay more, if one
enquire exactly, in other ways also sloth is wont to undo us, and to cause us
much trouble. Let us, if you will, shut a man up, only feeding and pampering
him, not allowing him to walk nor conducting him forth to work, but let him
enjoy table and bed, and be in luxury continually; what could be more wretched
than such a life? "But," says one, "to work is one thing, to labor is another." Yea,
but it was in man's power then to work without labor. "And is this," says he,
"possible?" Yea, it is possible; God even desired it, but you endured it not.
Therefore He placed you to work in the garden, marking out employment, but
joining with it no labor. For had man labored at the beginning, God would not
afterwards have put labor by way of punishment. For it is possible to work and
not to be wearied, as do the angels. To prove that they work, hear what David
says; "You that excel in strength, you that do His word." [Psalm 103:20,
Septuagint] Want of strength causes much labor now, but then it was not so. For
"he that has entered into His rest, has ceased," says one, "from his works, as
God from His" [Hebrews 4:10]: not meaning here idleness, but the ceasing from
labor. For God works even now, as Christ says, "My Father works hitherto, and I
work." [John 5:17] Wherefore I exhort you that, laying aside all carelessness,
you be zealous for virtue. For the pleasure of wickedness is short, but the pain
lasting; of virtue, on the contrary, the joy grows not old, the labor is but for a
season. Virtue even before the crowns are distributed animates her workman,
and feeds him with hopes; vice even before the time of vengeance punishes him
who works for her, wringing and terrifying his conscience, and making it apt to
imagine all (evils). Are not these things worse than any labors, than any toils?
And if these things were not so, if there were pleasure, what could be more
worthless than that pleasure? For as soon as it appears it flies away, withering
and escaping before it has been grasped, whether you speak of the pleasure of
beauty, or that of luxury, or that of wealth, for they cease not daily to decay. But
when there is besides (for this pleasure) punishment and vengeance, what can be