the work of adornment, which is distinct from perfect. For the
perfection of the heaven and the earth regards, seemingly, those
things that belong to them intrinsically, but the adornment, those
that are extrinsic, just as the perfection of a man lies in his proper
parts and forms, and his adornment, in clothing or such like. Now
just as distinction of certain things is made most evident by their
local movement, as separating one from another; so the work of
adornment is set forth by the production of things having movement
in the heavens, and upon the earth. But it has been stated above
(Question 69, Article 1), that three things are recorded as created,
namely, the heaven, the water, and the earth; and these three
received their form from the three days' work of distinction, so that
heaven was formed on the first day; on the second day the waters
were separated; and on the third day, the earth was divided into sea
and dry land. So also is it in the work of adornment; on the first day
of this work, which is the fourth of creation, are produced the lights,
to adorn the heaven by their movements; on the second day, which
is the fifth, birds and fishes are called into being, to make beautiful
the intermediate element, for they move in air and water, which are
here taken as one; while on the third day, which is the sixth, animals
are brought forth, to move upon the earth and adorn it. It must also
here be noted that Augustine's opinion (Gen. ad lit. v, 5) on the
production of lights is not at variance with that of other holy writers,
since he says that they were made actually, and not merely virtually,
for the firmament has not the power of producing lights, as the earth
has of producing plants. Wherefore Scripture does not say: "Let the
firmament produce lights," though it says: "Let the earth bring forth
the green herb."
Reply to Objection 1: In Augustine's opinion there is no difficulty
here; for he does not hold a succession of time in these works, and
so there was no need for the matter of the lights to exist under
another form. Nor is there any difficulty in the opinion of those who
hold the heavenly bodies to be of the nature of the four elements, for
it may be said that they were formed out of matter already existing,
as animals and plants were formed. For those, however, who hold
the heavenly bodies to be of another nature from the elements, and
naturally incorruptible, the answer must be that the lights were
substantially created at the beginning, but that their substance, at
first formless, is formed on this day, by receiving not its substantial
form, but a determination of power. As to the fact that the lights are
not mentioned as existing from the beginning, but only as made on
the fourth day, Chrysostom (Hom. vi in Gen.) explains this by the