FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.7.

share of their own good. Another principle is man's habitual
inclination to do good, by reason of which doing good becomes
connatural to him: for which reason the liberal man takes pleasure in
giving to others. The third principle is the motive: for instance when
a man is moved by one whom he loves, to do good to someone: for
whatever we do or suffer for a friend is pleasant, because love is the
principal cause of pleasure.
Reply to Objection 1: Spending gives pleasure as showing forth
one's good. But in so far as it empties us of our own good it may be
a cause of sadness; for instance when it is excessive.
Reply to Objection 2: Prodigality is an excessive spending, which is
unnatural: wherefore prodigality is said to be contrary to nature.
Reply to Objection 3: To overcome, to contradict, and to punish, give
pleasure, not as tending to another's ill, but as pertaining to one's
own good, which man loves more than he hates another's ill. For it is
naturally pleasant to overcome, inasmuch as it makes a man to
appreciate his own superiority. Wherefore all those games in which
there is a striving for the mastery, and a possibility of winning it,
afford the greatest pleasure: and speaking generally all contests, in
so far as they admit hope of victory. To contradict and to scold can
give pleasure in two ways. First, as making man imagine himself to
be wise and excellent; since it belongs to wise men and elders to
reprove and to scold. Secondly, in so far as by scolding and
reproving, one does good to another: for this gives one pleasure, as
stated above. It is pleasant to an angry man to punish, in so far as he
thinks himself to be removing an apparent slight, which seems to be
due to a previous hurt: for when a man is hurt by another, he seems
to be slighted thereby; and therefore he wishes to be quit of this
slight by paying back the hurt. And thus it is clear that doing good to
another may be of itself pleasant: whereas doing evil to another is
not pleasant, except in so far as it seems to affect one's own good.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether likeness is a cause of pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that likeness is not a cause of pleasure.
Because ruling and presiding seem to imply a certain unlikeness.
But "it is natural to take pleasure in ruling and presiding," as stated
in Rhetor. i, 11. Therefore unlikeness, rather than likeness, is a cause
of pleasure.
Objection 2: Further, nothing is more unlike pleasure than sorrow.
But those who are burdened by sorrow are most inclined to seek
pleasures, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 14). Therefore
unlikeness, rather than likeness, is a cause of pleasure.
Objection 3: Further, those who are satiated with certain delights,
derive not pleasure but disgust from them; as when one is satiated
with food. Therefore likeness is not a cause of pleasure.
On the contrary, Likeness is a cause of love, as above stated
(Question 27, Article 3): and love is the cause of pleasure. Therefore
likeness is a cause of pleasure.
I answer that, Likeness is a kind of unity; hence that which is like us,
as being one with us, causes pleasure; just at it causes love, as
stated above (Question 27, Article 3). And if that which is like us
does not hurt our own good, but increase it, it is pleasurable simply;
for instance one man in respect of another, one youth in relation to
another. But if it be hurtful to our own good, thus accidentally it
causes disgust or sadness, not as being like and one with us, but as
hurtful to that which is yet more one with us.
Now it happens in two ways that something like is hurtful to our own
good. First, by destroying the measure of our own good, by a kind of
excess; because good, especially bodily good, as health, is
conditioned by a certain measure: wherefore superfluous good or
any bodily pleasure, causes disgust. Secondly, by being directly
contrary to one's own good: thus a potter dislikes other potters, not
because they are potters, but because they deprive him of his own
excellence or profits, which he seeks as his own good.
Reply to Objection 1: Since ruler and subject are in communion with
one another, there is a certain likeness between them: but this