THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.5.

substances of the bread and wine are not, but by addition or
division; for, as is said in Metaph. iii, one dimension is dissolved by
division, and two dimensions result; while on the contrary, by
addition, two dimensions become one. And in this way such
accidents can be corrupted manifestly after consecration, because
the dimensive quantity which remains can receive division and
addition; and since it is the subject of sensible qualities, as stated
above (Article 1), it can likewise be the subject of their alteration, for
instance, if the color or the savor of the bread or wine be altered.
An accident can be corrupted in another way, through the corruption
of its subject, and in this way also they can be corrupted after
consecration; for although the subject does not remain, still the
being which they had in the subject does remain, which being is
proper, and suited to the subject. And therefore such being can be
corrupted by a contrary agent, as the substance of the bread or wine
was subject to corruption, and, moreover, was not corrupted except
by a preceding alteration regarding the accidents.
Nevertheless, a distinction must be made between each of the
aforesaid corruptions; because, when the body and the blood of
Christ succeed in this sacrament to the substance of the bread and
wine, if there be such change on the part of the accidents as would
not have sufficed for the corruption of the bread and wine, then the
body and blood of Christ do not cease to be under this sacrament on
account of such change, whether the change be on the part of the
quality, as for instance, when the color or the savor of the bread or
wine is slightly modified; or on the part of the quantity, as when the
bread or the wine is divided into such parts as to keep in them the
nature of bread or of wine. But if the change be so great that the
substance of the bread or wine would have been corrupted, then
Christ's body and blood do not remain under this sacrament; and
this either on the part of the qualities, as when the color, savor, and
other qualities of the bread and wine are so altered as to be
incompatible with the nature of bread or of wine; or else on the part
of the quantity, as, for instance, if the bread be reduced to fine
particles, or the wine divided into such tiny drops that the species of
bread or wine no longer remain.
Reply to Objection 1: Since it belongs essentially to corruption to
take away the being of a thing, in so far as the being of some form is
in matter, it results that by corruption the form is separated from the
matter. But if such being were not in matter, yet like such being as is

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.5.

in matter, it could be taken away by corruption, even where there is
no matter; as takes place in this sacrament, as is evident from what
was said above.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the sacramental species are forms
not in matter, yet they have the being which they had in matter.
Reply to Objection 3: This corruption of species is not miraculous,
but natural; nevertheless, it presupposes the miracle which is
wrought in the consecration, namely, that those sacramental species
retain without a subject, the same being as they had in a subject;
just as a blind man, to whom sight is given miraculously, sees
naturally.