FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.2.

ordained for a double purpose; the worship of God, and the
foreshadowing of Christ. Now whoever worships God must needs
worship Him by means of certain fixed things pertaining to external
worship. But the fixing of the divine worship belongs to the
ceremonies; just as the determining of our relations with our
neighbor is a matter determined by the judicial precepts, as stated
above (Question 99, Article 4). Consequently, as among men in
general there were certain judicial precepts, not indeed established
by Divine authority, but ordained by human reason; so also there
were some ceremonies fixed, not by the authority of any law, but
according to the will and devotion of those that worship God. Since,
however, even before the Law some of the leading men were gifted
with the spirit of prophecy, it is to be believed that a heavenly
instinct, like a private law, prompted them to worship God in a
certain definite way, which would be both in keeping with the interior
worship, and a suitable token of Christ's mysteries, which were
foreshadowed also by other things that they did, according to 1 Cor.
10:11: "All . . . things happened to them in figure." Therefore there
were some ceremonies before the Law, but they were not legal
ceremonies, because they were not as yet established by legislation.
Reply to Objection 1: The patriarchs offered up these oblations,
sacrifices and holocausts previously to the Law, out of a certain
devotion of their own will, according as it seemed proper to them to
offer up in honor of God those things which they had received from
Him, and thus to testify that they worshipped God Who is the
beginning and end of all.
Reply to Objection 2: They also established certain sacred things,
because they thought that the honor due to God demanded that
certain places should be set apart from others for the purpose of
divine worship.
Reply to Objection 3: The sacrament of circumcision was
established by command of God before the Law. Hence it cannot be
called a sacrament of the Law as though it were an institution of the
Law, but only as an observance included in the Law. Hence Our Lord
said (Jn. 7:20) that circumcision was "not of Moses, but of his
fathers." Again, among those who worshipped God, the priesthood
was in existence before the Law by human appointment, for the Law
allotted the priestly dignity to the firstborn.
Reply to Objection 4: The distinction of clean from unclean animals

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.2.

was in vogue before the Law, not with regard to eating them, since it
is written (Gn. 9:3): "Everything that moveth and liveth shall be meat
for you": but only as to the offering of sacrifices because they used
only certain animals for that purpose. If, however, they did make any
distinction in regard to eating; it was not that it was considered
illegal to eat such animals, since this was not forbidden by any law,
but from dislike or custom: thus even now we see that certain foods
are looked upon with disgust in some countries, while people
partake of them in others.