SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.2.

proceeding from his own counsel. And just as he has to proceed on
his own counsel in doing other things, so too has he in the point of
obeying his superiors. For Gregory says (Moral. xxxv), "When we
humbly give way to another's voice, we overcome ourselves in our
own hearts."
Reply to Objection 2: The will of God is the first rule whereby all
rational wills are regulated: and to this rule one will approaches
more than another, according to a divinely appointed order. Hence
the will of the one man who issues a command may be as a second
rule to the will of this other man who obeys him.
Reply to Objection 3: A thing may be deemed gratuitous in two ways.
In one way on the part of the deed itself, because, to wit, one is not
bound to do it; in another way, on the part of the doer, because he
does it of his own free will. Now a deed is rendered virtuous,
praiseworthy and meritorious, chiefly according as it proceeds from
the will. Wherefore although obedience be a duty, if one obey with a
prompt will, one's merit is not for that reason diminished, especially
before God, Who sees not only the outward deed, but also the
inward will.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether obedience is a special virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that obedience is not a special virtue. For
disobedience is contrary to obedience. But disobedience is a general
sin, because Ambrose says (De Parad. viii) that "sin is to disobey the
divine law." Therefore obedience is not a special virtue.
Objection 2: Further, every special virtue is either theological or
moral. But obedience is not a theological virtue, since it is not
comprised under faith, hope or charity. Nor is it a moral virtue, since
it does not hold the mean between excess and deficiency, for the
more obedient one is the more is one praised. Therefore obedience
is not a special virtue.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience is
the more meritorious and praiseworthy, the less it holds its own."
But every special virtue is the more to be praised the more it holds
its own, since virtue requires a man to exercise his will and choice,
as stated in Ethic. ii, 4. Therefore obedience is not a special virtue.
Objection 4: Further, virtues differ in species according to their
objects. Now the object of obedience would seem to be the
command of a superior, of which, apparently, there are as many
kinds as there are degrees of superiority. Therefore obedience is a
general virtue, comprising many special virtues.
On the contrary, obedience is reckoned by some to be a part of
justice, as stated above (Question 80).
I answer that, A special virtue is assigned to all good deeds that
have a special reason of praise: for it belongs properly to virtue to
render a deed good. Now obedience to a superior is due in
accordance with the divinely established order of things, as shown
above (Article 1), and therefore it is a good, since good consists in
mode, species and order, as Augustine states (De Natura Boni iii)
[FP, Question 5, Article 5]. Again, this act has a special aspect of
praiseworthiness by reason of its object. For while subjects have
many obligations towards their superiors, this one, that they are
bound to obey their commands, stands out as special among the
rest. Wherefore obedience is a special virtue, and its specific object
is a command tacit or expreSS, because the superior's will, however