obtained not.

2 Corinthians 1:18
"But as God is faithful, our word toward you was not yea and nay."
He skillfully overturns a rising objection. For one might say, If after having
promised, you have put off coming, and yea is not yea, and nay nay, with you,
but what you say now you unsay afterwards, as you did in the case of this
Journey: woe is unto us, if all this were the case in the Preaching too. Now lest
they should have these thoughts and be troubled thereat, he says, "But as God is
faithful, our word toward you was not yea and nay." This, says he, was not the
case in the Preaching, but only in our travels and journeyings; whereas whatever
things we have said in our preaching, these abide steadfast and unmoveable, (for
he calls his preaching here, "word.") Then he brings proof of this that cannot be
gainsaid, by referring all to God. What he says is this; 'the promise of my
coming was my own and I gave that promise from myself: but the preaching is
not my own, nor of man, but of God, and what is of God it is impossible should
lie.' Whereupon also he said, "God is faithful," that is, "true." 'Mistrust not then
what is from Him, for there is nought of man in it.'
4. And seeing he had said "word," he adds what follows to explain what
kind of word he means. Of what kind then is it?

2 Corinthians 1:19
"For the Son of God," says he, "Who was preached among you by us, even
by me, and Silvanus, and Timothy, was not yea and nay."
For on this account he brings before them the company of the teachers also,
as thence too giving credibility to the testimony by those who taught, and not
who heard it only. And yet they were disciples; however in his modesty he
counts them as in the rank of teachers. But what is, "was not yea and nay?" I
have never, he says, unsaid what before I said in the Preaching. My discourse to
you was not now this, now that. For this is not of faith, but of an erring mind.
"But in Him was the yea." That is, just as I said, the word abides unshaken
and steadfast.

2 Corinthians 1:20
"For how many soever be the promises of God," in Him is the yea, and in
Him the Amen, unto the glory of God by us.
What is this, "how many soever the promises of God?" The Preaching
promised many things; and these many things they proffered and preached. For
they discoursed of being raised again, and of being taken up, and of incorruption,
and of those great rewards and unspeakable goods. As to these promises then, he
says that they abide immoveable, and in them is no yea and nay, that is, the
things spoken were not now true, and now false, as was the case about my being
with you, but always true. And first indeed he contends for the articles of the
faith, and the word concerning Christ, saying, "My word" and my preaching,
"was not yea and nay;" next, for the promises "for how many soever be the
promises, of God, in Him is the yea." But if the things He promised are sure and
He will certainly give them, much more is He Himself and the word concerning
Him, sure, and it can not be said that He is now, and now is not, but He "always"
is, and is the same. But what is, "In Him is the yea, and the Amen." He signifies
that which shall certainly be. For in Him, not in man, the promises have their
being and fulfilment. Fear not, therefore; for it is not man so that you should
mistrust; but it is God Who both said and fulfills. "Unto the glory of God
through us." What is, "unto [His] glory through us?" He fulfills them by us, that
is, and by His benefits towards us unto His glory; for this is "for the glory of
God." But if they be for the glory of God, they will certainly come to pass. For
His own glory He will not think little of, even did He think little of our salvation.
But as it is, He thinks not little of our salvation either, both because He loves
mankind exceedingly, and because our salvation is bound up with His glory from
these things accruing. So that if the promises are for His glory, our salvation also
will certainly follow; to which also, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, he reverts