not. All the greater the reward to you. True, say you, but the matter is more
difficult. How, I ask? Lo! I testify and declare to you, that if but ten of you
would knit yourselves together, and make this your work, as the Apostles made
the preaching theirs, and the Prophets theirs the teaching, so we the making of
friends, great would be the reward. Let us make for ourselves royal portraits. For
if this be the common badge of disciples, we do a greater work than if we should
put ourselves into the power to raise the dead. The diadem and the purple mark
the Emperor, and where these are not, though his apparel be all gold, the
Emperor is not yet manifest. So now you are making known your lineage. Make
men friends to yourself, and (friends) to others. There is none who being loved
will wish to hate you. Let us learn the colors, with what ingredients they are
mixed, with what (tints) this portrait is composed. Let us be affable: let us not
wait for our neighbors to move. Say not, if I see any person hanging back (for
me to make the first advances), I become worse than he: but rather when you see
this, forestall him, and extinguish his bad feeling. Do you see one diseased, and
add to his malady? This, most of all, let us make sure of— "in honor to prefer
one another, to account others better than one's self" [Romans 12:10], deem not
this to be a lessening of yourself. If you prefer (another) in honor, you have
honored yourself more, attracting to yourself a still higher extinction. On all
occasions let us yield the precedence to others. Let us bear nothing in mind of
the evil done to us, but if any good has been done (let us remember only that).
Nothing so makes a man a friend, as a gracious tongue, a mouth speaking good
things, a soul free from self-elation, a contempt of vain-glory, a despising of
honor. If we secure these things, we shall be able to become invincible to the
snares of the Devil, and having with strictness accomplished the pursuit of
virtue, to attain unto the good things promised to them that love Him, through
the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the
Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.

Homily 41 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XIX. 8, 9
"And he went into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of three
months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God.
But when various were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way
before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples,
disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus."
(a) See him in every place forcing his way into the synagogue, and in this
manner departing thence. For in every place, he wished to have the occasion
given him by them. (c) He wished to separate the disciples thence, and to have
the beginning for ceasing to assemble with them, given by (the Jews)
themselves. And it was not for nothing that he did this (b) which I have said. He
was henceforth "provoking them to jealousy." For both the Gentiles readily
received him, and the Jews, upon the Gentiles receiving him, repented. (a) This
is why he continually made a stir among them, "for three months arguing and
persuading concerning the kingdom of God:" for you must not suppose because
you hear of his "speaking boldly," that there was any harshness: it was of good
things that he discoursed, of a kingdom: who would not have heard him? "But
when various were hardened, speaking evil of the way." They might well call it
"the way;" this was indeed the way, that led into the kingdom of heaven. "He
departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the school of
one Tyrannus. And this was done for the space of two years, so that all that were
in Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks." [Acts 19:10] (a) Do
you mark how much was effected by his persisting? "Both Jews and Greeks
heard: (c) all that dwelt in Asia:" it was for this also that the Lord suffered him
not to go into Asia [Acts 16:6] (on a former occasion); waiting, as it seems to
me, for this same conjuncture. (Hom. xl. p. 245.) (b) "And God wrought special