men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father." [John 5:23] "As the
Father raises up the dead and quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom He
will." [John 5:21] "My Father works hitherto, and I work." [John 5:17] "As the
Father knows Me, even so know I the Father." [John 10:15] "I and My Father
are One." [John 10:30] And everywhere by putting the "as," and the "so," and
the "being with the Father," He declares His undeviating likeness to Him. His
power in Himself He manifests by these, as well as by many other words; as
when He says, "Peace, be still." [Mark 4:39] "I will, be thou clean." [Matthew
8:3] "Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge you, come out of him." [Mark 9:25]
And again, "You have heard that it was said by them of old time, You shall not
kill; but I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger." [Matthew 5:21-22] And all the other laws which He
gave, and wonders which He worked, are sufficient to show His power, or rather,
I should say, a very small part of them is enough to bring over and convince any,
except the utterly insensate.
5. But vainglory is a thing powerful to blind even to very evident truths the
minds of those ensnared by it, and to persuade them to dispute against what is
allowed by others; nay, it instigates some who know and are persuaded of the
truth to pretended ignorance and opposition. As took place in the case of the
Jews, for they did not through ignorance deny the Son of God, but that they
might obtain honor from the multitude; "they believed," says the Evangelist, but
were afraid, "lest they should be put out of the synagogue." [John 12:40] And so
they gave up their salvation to others. For it cannot be that he who is so zealous a
slave to the glory of this present world can obtain the glory which is from God.
Wherefore He rebuked them, saying, "How can you believe, which receive honor
of men, and seek not the honor which comes from God?" [John 5:44] This
passion is a sort of deep intoxication, and makes him who is subdued by it hard
to recover. And having detached the souls of its captives from heavenly things, it
nails them to earth, and lets them not look up to the true light, but persuades
them ever to wallow in the mire, giving them masters so powerful, that they have

the rule over them without needing to use commands. For the man who is sick of
this disease, does of his own accord, and without bidding, all that he thinks will
be agreeable to his masters. On their account he clothes himself in rich apparel,
and beautifies his face, taking these pains not for himself but for others; and he
leads about a train of followers through the market-place, that others may admire
him, and all that he does he goes through, merely out of obsequiousness to the
rest of the world. Can any state of mind be more wretched than this? That others
may admire him, he is ever being precipitated to ruin.
Would you learn what a tyrannous sway it exercises? Why surely, the words
of Christ are sufficient to show it all. But yet listen to these further remarks. If
you will ask any of those men who mingle in state affairs and incur great
expenses, why they lavish so much gold, and what their so vast expenditure
means; you will hear from them, that it is for nothing else but to gratify the
people. If again you ask what the people may be; they will say, that it is a thing
full of confusion and turbulent, made up for the most part of folly, tossed blindly
to and fro like the waves of the sea, and often composed of varying and adverse
opinions. Must not the man who has such a master be more pitiable than any
one? And yet strange though it be, it is not so strange that worldly men should be
eager about these things; but that those who say that they have started away from
the world should be sick of this same disease, or rather of one more grievous
still, this is the strangest thing of all. For with the first the loss extends only to
money, but in the last case the danger reaches to the soul. For when men alter a
right faith for reputation's sake, and dishonor God that they may be in high
repute themselves, tell me, what excess of stupidity and madness must there not
be in what they do? Other passions, even if they are very hurtful, at least bring
some pleasure with them, though it be but for a time and fleeting; those who love
money, or wine, or women, have, with their hurt, a pleasure, though a brief one.
But those who are taken captives by this passion, live a life continually
embittered and stripped of enjoyment, for they do not obtain what they earnestly
desire, glory, I mean, from the many. They think they enjoy it, but do not really,