operation of any kind: whereas those things that cannot by their
nature do so, cannot be called living, unless by a similitude.
Reply to Objection 1: These words of the Philosopher may be
understood either of the first movement, namely, that of the celestial
bodies, or of the movement in its general sense. In either way is
movement called the life, as it were, of natural bodies, speaking by a
similitude, and not attributing it to them as their property. The
movement of the heavens is in the universe of corporeal natures as
the movement of the heart, whereby life is preserved, is in animals.
Similarly also every natural movement in respect to natural things
has a certain similitude to the operations of life. Hence, if the whole
corporeal universe were one animal, so that its movement came from
an "intrinsic moving force," as some in fact have held, in that case
movement would really be the life of all natural bodies.
Reply to Objection 2: To bodies, whether heavy or light, movement
does not belong, except in so far as they are displaced from their
natural conditions, and are out of their proper place; for when they
are in the place that is proper and natural to them, then they are at
rest. Plants and other living things move with vital movement, in
accordance with the disposition of their nature, but not by
approaching thereto, or by receding from it, for in so far as they
recede from such movement, so far do they recede from their natural
disposition. Heavy and light bodies are moved by an extrinsic force,
either generating them and giving them form, or removing obstacles
from their way. They do not therefore move themselves, as do living
bodies.
Reply to Objection 3: Waters are called living that have a continuous
current: for standing waters, that are not connected with a
continually flowing source, are called dead, as in cisterns and
ponds. This is merely a similitude, inasmuch as the movement they
are seen to possess makes them look as if they were alive. Yet this is
not life in them in its real sense, since this movement of theirs is not
from themselves but from the cause that generates them. The same
is the case with the movement of other heavy and light bodies.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether life is an operation?

Objection 1: It seems that life is an operation. For nothing is divided
except into parts of the same genus. But life is divided by certain
operations, as is clear from the Philosopher (De Anima ii, 13), who
distinguishes four kinds of life, namely, nourishment, sensation,
local movement and understanding. Therefore life is an operation.
Objection 2: Further, the active life is said to be different from the
contemplative. But the contemplative is only distinguished from the
active by certain operations. Therefore life is an operation.
Objection 3: Further, to know God is an operation. But this is life, as
is clear from the words of Jn. 18:3, "Now this is eternal life, that they
may know Thee, the only true God." Therefore life is an operation.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 37), "In living
things, to live is to be."
I answer that, As is clear from what has been said (Question 17,
Article 3), our intellect, which takes cognizance of the essence of a
thing as its proper object, gains knowledge from sense, of which the
proper objects are external accidents. Hence from external
appearances we come to the knowledge of the essence of things.
And because we name a thing in accordance with our knowledge of
it, as is clear from what has already been said (Question 13, Article
1), so from external properties names are often imposed to signify
essences. Hence such names are sometimes taken strictly to denote
the essence itself, the signification of which is their principal object;
but sometimes, and less strictly, to denote the properties by reason
of which they are imposed. And so we see that the word "body" is
used to denote a genus of substances from the fact of their
possessing three dimensions: and is sometimes taken to denote the
dimensions themselves; in which sense body is said to be a species
of quantity. The same must be said of life. The name is given from a
certain external appearance, namely, self-movement, yet not
precisely to signify this, but rather a substance to which selfmovement and the application of itself to any kind of operation,
belong naturally. To live, accordingly, is nothing else than to exist in
this or that nature; and life signifies this, though in the abstract, just
as the word "running" denotes "to run" in the abstract.