by nature itself both honorable and necessary. Which in truth Paul himself
imitated, giving his judgment in their favor not from our care and from their
enjoying greater honor, but from the very nature of the things.
Wherefore when he calls them "weak" and "less honorable," he uses the
expression, "which seem:" but when he calls them "necessary," he no longer
adds "which seem," but himself gives his judgment, saying, "they are
necessary;" and very properly. For they are useful to procreation of children and
the succession of our race. Wherefore also the Roman legislators punish them
that mutilate these members and make men eunuchs, as persons who do injury to
our common stock and affront nature herself.
But woe to the dissolute who bring reproach on the handy-works of God.
For as many are wont to curse wine on account of the drunken, and womankind
on account of the unchaste; so also they account these members base because of
those who use them not as they ought. But improperly. For the sin is not allotted
to the thing as a portion of its nature, but the transgression is produced by the
will of him that ventures on it.
But some suppose that the expressions, "the feeble members," and "less
honorable," and "necessary," and "which enjoy more abundant honor," are used
by Paul of eyes and feet, and that he speaks of the eye as "more feeble," and
"necessary," because though deficient in strength, they have the advantage in
utility: but of the feet as the "less honorable:" for these also receive from us
great consideration.
3. Next, not to work out yet another amplification, he says,

1 Corinthians 12:24
"But our comely parts have no need:"
That is, lest any should say, "Why what kind of speech is this, to despise the
honorable and pay court to the less honored?" "we do not this in contempt," says
he, "but because they 'have no need.'" And see how large a measure of praise he
thus sets down in brief, and so hastens on: a thing most conveniently and
usefully done. And neither is he content with this, but adds also the cause,
saying, "But God tempered the body together, giving more abundant honor unto
that part which lacked:"

1 Corinthians 12:25
"That there should be no schism in the body."
Now if He tempered it together, He did not suffer that which is more
uncomely to appear. For that which is mingled becomes one thing, and it does
not appear what it was before: since otherwise we could not say that it was
tempered. And see how he continually hastens by the defects, saying, "that
which lacked." He said not, "to that which is dishonorable," "to that which is
unseemly," but, to that which lacked, ("that which lacked;" how? By nature,)
giving more abundant honor. And wherefore? "That there should be no schism in
the body." Thus because, though they enjoyed an endless store of consolation,
they nevertheless indulged grief as if they had received less than others, he
signifies that they were rather honored. For his phrase is, "Giving more abundant
honor to that which lacked."
Next he also adds the reason, showing that with a view to their profit he
both caused it to lack and more abundantly honored it. And what is the reason?
"That there should be no schism," says he, "in the body." (And he said not, "in
the members," but, "in the body.") For there would indeed be a great and unfair
advantage, if some members were cared for both by nature and by our
forethought, others not even by either one of these. Then would they be cut off
from one another, from inability to endure the connection. And when these were
cut off, there would be harm done also to the rest. Do you see how he points out,
that of necessity "greater honor" is given to "that which lacks?" "For had not
this been so, the injury would have become common to all," says he. And the
reason is, that unless these received great consideration on our part, they would
have been rudely treated, as not having the help of nature: and this rude
treatment would have been their ruin: their ruin would have divided the body;
and the body having been divided, the other members also would have perished,