FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.5.

prescribed many more outward acts than the New Law, which, in the
teaching of Christ and the apostles, added very few precepts to
those of the natural law; although afterwards some were added,
through being instituted by the holy Fathers. Even in these
Augustine says that moderation should be observed, lest good
conduct should become a burden to the faithful. For he says in reply
to the queries of Januarius (Ep. lv) that, "whereas God in His mercy
wished religion to be a free service rendered by the public
solemnization of a small number of most manifest sacraments,
certain persons make it a slave's burden; so much so that the state
of the Jews who were subject to the sacraments of the Law, and not
to the presumptuous devices of man, was more tolerable."
The other difficulty attaches to works of virtue as to interior acts: for
instance, that a virtuous deed be done with promptitude and
pleasure. It is this difficulty that virtue solves: because to act thus is
difficult for a man without virtue: but through virtue it becomes easy
for him. In this respect the precepts of the New Law are more
burdensome than those of the Old; because the New Law prohibits
certain interior movements of the soul, which were not expressly
forbidden in the Old Law in all cases, although they were forbidden
in some, without, however, any punishment being attached to the
prohibition. Now this is very difficult to a man without virtue: thus
even the Philosopher states (Ethic. v, 9) that it is easy to do what a
righteous man does; but that to do it in the same way, viz. with
pleasure and promptitude, is difficult to a man who is not righteous.
Accordingly we read also (1 Jn. 5:3) that "His commandments are
not heavy": which words Augustine expounds by saying that "they
are not heavy to the man that loveth; whereas they are a burden to
him that loveth not."
Reply to Objection 1: The passage quoted speaks expressly of the
difficulty of the New Law as to the deliberate curbing of interior
movements.
Reply to Objection 2: The tribulations suffered by those who observe
the New Law are not imposed by the Law itself. Moreover they are
easily borne, on account of the love in which the same Law consists:
since, as Augustine says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxx), "love makes
light and nothing of things that seem arduous and beyond our
power."
Reply to Objection 3: The object of these additions to the precepts of

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.5.

the Old Law was to render it easier to do what it prescribed, as
Augustine states [De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 17,21; xix, 23,26].
Accordingly this does not prove that the New Law is more
burdensome, but rather that it is a lighter burden.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.1.

## QUESTION 108 — OF THOSE THINGS THAT ARE CONTAINED IN THE