being and in activity; and therefore it is neither generated by the generation of the body,
nor perishes by its destruction.
Arg. 2. As Aristotle teaches, in point of time the foetus is an animal before it is a man.

Arg. 5. If souls are created by God, He puts the last hand to the engendering of children
born sometimes of adultery.
Reply. There is no difficulty in that. Not the nature of adulterers is evil, but their will: now
the effect which their semen produces is natural, not voluntary: hence there is no
difficulty in God's co-operating to that effect and giving it completeness.
In a book ascribed to Gregory of Nyssa there are found further arguments, as
follows:
Arg. 6. Soul and body make one whole, that is, one man. If then the soul is made before
the body, or the body before the soul, the same thing will be prior and posterior to itself.
Therefore body and soul are made together. But the body begins in the cutting off, or
emission, of the semen. Therefore the soul also is brought into being by the same.
Reply. Allowing that the human body is formed before the soul is created, or conversely,
still it does not follow that the same man is prior to himself: for man is not his body or his
soul. It only follows that one part of him is prior to another part; and in that there is no
difficulty: for matter is prior in time to form, -- matter, I mean, inasmuch as it is in
potentiality to form, not inasmuch as it is actually perfected by form, for so it is together
with form. The human body then, inasmuch as it is in potentiality to soul, as not yet
having the soul, is prior in time to the soul: but, for that time, it is not actually human,
only potentially so: but when it is actually human, as being perfected by a human soul, it
is neither prior nor posterior to the soul, but together with it.
Arg. 7. An agent's activity seems to be imperfect, when he does not produce and bring
the whole thing into being, but only half makes it. If then God brought the soul into
being, while the body was formed by the power of the male semen, body and soul being
the two parts of man, the activities of God and of the seminal power would be both
imperfect. Therefore the body and soul of man are both produced by the same cause.
But certainly the body of man is produced by the power of the semen: therefore also the
soul.
Reply. Body and soul are both produced by the power of God, though the formation of
the body is of God through the intermediate instrumentality of the power of the natural
semen, while the soul He produces immediately. Neither does it follow that the action of
the power of the semen is imperfect, since it fulfils the purpose of its existence.
Arg. 8. In all things that are engendered of seed, the parts of the thing engendered are
all contained together in the seed, though they do not actually appear: as we see that in
wheat or in any other send the green blade and stalk and knots and grains and ears are
virtually contained in the original seed; and afterwards the seed gathers bulk and
expansion by a process of natural consequence leading to its perfection, without taking
up any new feature from without. But the soul is part of man. Therefore in the male
semen of man the human soul is virtually contained, and it does not take its origin from
any exterior cause.