Satan has asked to have you that he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for
you that your faith fail not." [Luke 22:31-32] What is the meaning of "sift"? To
turn and twist, and shake and stir and shatter, and worry, which is what takes
place in the case of things which are winnowed: but I he says have restrained
him, knowing that you are not able to endure the trial, for the expression "that
your faith fail not" is the utterance of one who signifies that if he had permitted
it his faith would have failed. Now if Peter who was such a fervent lover of
Christ and exposed his life for Him countless times and sprang into the foremost
rank in the Apostolic band, and was pronounced blessed by his Master, and
called Peter on this account because he kept a firm and inflexible hold of the
faith, would have been carried away and fallen from profession if Christ had
permitted the devil to try him as much as he desired, what other man will be able
to stand, apart from His help? Therefore also Paul says "But God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the
temptation also make the way of escape that you may be able to bear it."
[1 Corinthians 10:13] For not only does He say that He does not suffer a trial to
be inflicted beyond our strength, but even in that which is proportioned to our
strength He is present carrying us through it, and bracing us up, if only we
ourselves first of all contribute the means which are at our disposal, such as zeal,
hope in Him, thanksgiving, endurance, patience. For not only in the dangers
which are beyond our strength, but in those which are proportioned to it, we
need the divine assistance, if we are to make a brave stand; for elsewhere also it
is said "even as the sufferings of Christ abound to us, even so our comfort also
abounds through Christ, that we may be able to comfort those who are in any
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God." So then
he who comforted this man is the same who permitted the trial to be inflicted
upon him. And now observe after the cure what tenderness He displays. For He
did not leave him and depart, but having found him in the temple he says
"behold! You are made whole; sin no more lest some worse thing happen unto
you." [John 5:14] For had He permitted the punishment because He hated him

He would not have released him, He would not have provided for his future
safety: but the expression "lest some worse thing happen unto you" is the
utterance of one who would check coming evils beforehand. He put an end to the
disease, but did not put an end to the struggle: He expelled the infirmity but did
not expel the dread of it, so that the benefit which had been wrought might
remain unmoved. This is the part of a tender-hearted physician, not only to put
an end to present pains, but to provide for future security, which also Christ did,
bracing up his soul by the recollection of past events. For seeing that when the
things which distress us have departed, the recollection of them oftentimes
departs with them, He wishing it to abide continually, says "sin no more lest
some worse thing happen unto you."
3. Moreover it is possible to discern His forethought and consideration not
only from this, but also from that which seems to be a rebuke. For He did not
make a public exposure of his sins, but yet He told him that he suffered what he
did suffer on account of his sins, but what those sins were He did not disclose;
nor did He say "you have sinned" or "you have transgressed," but He indicated
the fact by one simple utterance "sin no more;" and having said so much as just
to remind him of it He put him more on the alert against future events, and at the
same time He made manifest to us all his patience and courage and wisdom,
having reduced him to the necessity of publicly lamenting his calamity, and
having displayed his own earnestness on the man's behalf, "for while I am
coming," he says, "another steps down before me:" [John 5:7] yet he did not
publicly expose his sins. For just as we ourselves desire to draw a veil over our
sins even so does God much more than we: on this account He wrought the cure
in the presence of all, but He gives the exhortation or the advice privately. For
He never makes a public display of our sins, except at any time He sees men
insensible to them. For when He says "ye saw me hungry, and fed me not: and
thirsty and gave me no drink," [Matthew 25:12] He speaks thus at the present
time in order that we may not hear these words in time to come. He threatens, He
exposes us in this world, that He may not have to expose us in the other: even as