with whom, etc.

## Homily 7 on Philippians

[Philippians 2:5-11]
"Have this mind in you which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the
form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God; but emptied
Himself, taking upon Him the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of
men: and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, becoming
obedient unto death, yea, the death of the cross. Wherefore also God highly
exalted Him, and gave Him the Name which is above every name: that in the
Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth,
and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."
I have stated the views of the heretics. It is befitting that I now speak of
what is our own. They say that the words, "He counted it not a prize," are of
wrongfully seizing. We have proved, that this is altogether vapid and
impertinent, for no man would exhort another to humility on such grounds, nor
in this sort does he praise God, or even man. What is it then, beloved? Give heed
to what I now say. Since many men think, that, when they are lowly, they are
deprived of their proper right, and debased, Paul, to take away this fear, and to
show that we must not be affected thus, says that God, the only begotten, who
was in the form of God, who was no whit inferior to the Father, who was equal
to Him, "counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God."
Now learn what this means. Whatsoever a man robs, and takes contrary to
his right, he dares not lay aside, from fear lest it perish, and fall from his
possession, but he keeps hold of it continually. He who possesses some dignity
which is natural to him, fears not to descend from that dignity, being assured that
nothing of this sort will happen to him. As for example, Absalom usurped the
government, and dared not afterwards to lay it aside. We will go to another

example, but if example cannot present the whole matter to you, take it not
amiss, for this is the nature of examples, they leave the greater part for the
imagination to reason out. A man rebels against his sovereign, and usurps the
kingdom: he dares not lay aside and hide the matter, for if he once hide it,
straightway it is gone. Let us also take another example; if a man takes anything
violently, he keeps firm hold of it continually, for if he lay it down, he
straightway loses it. And generally speaking, they who have anything by rapine
are afraid to lay it by, or hide it, or not to keep constantly in that state which they
have assumed. Not so they, who have possessions not procured by rapine, as
Man, who possesses the dignity of being a reasonable being. But here examples
fail me, for there is no natural preëminence among us, for no good thing is
naturally our own; but they are inherent in the nature of God. What does one say
then? That the Son of God feared not to descend from His right, for He thought
not Deity a prize seized. He was not afraid that any would strip Him of that
nature or that right, Wherefore He laid it aside, being confident that He should
take it up again. He hid it, knowing that He was not made inferior by so doing.
For this cause, Paul says not, "He seized not," but, "He counted it not a prize";
He possessed not that estate by seizure, but it was natural, not conferred, it was
enduring and safe. Wherefore he refused not to take the form of an inferior. The
tyrant fears to lay aside the purple robe in war, while the king does it with much
safety. Why so? Because he holds his power not as a matter of seizure. He did
not refuse to lay it aside, as one who had usurped it, but since He had it as His
own by nature, since it could never be parted from Him, He hid it.
This equality with God He had not by seizure, but as his own by nature.
Wherefore "He emptied Himself." Where be they who affirm, that He underwent
constraint, that He was subjected? Scripture says, "He emptied Himself, He
humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death." How did He empty
Himself? By taking "the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men,
and being found in fashion as a man." It is written, "He emptied Himself" in
reference to the text, "each counting other better than himself." Since had He