whereas the prophet said, "Thou hast received gifts in men," the apostle
has preferred saying, "He gave gifts to men:" and this in order that the
fullest sense may be gathered from both expressions, the one prophetic,
the other apostolic; because both possess the authority of a divine
utterance. For both are true, as well that He gave to men, as that He
received in men. He gave to men, as the head to His own members: He
Himself that gave, received in men, no doubt as in His own members; on
account of which, namely, His own members, He cried from heaven,
"Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" And of which, namely, His own
members, He says, "Since ye have done it to one of the least of these that
are mine, ye have done it unto me." Christ Himself, therefore, both gave
from heaven and received on earth. And further, both prophet and
apostle have said gifts for this reason, because many gifts, which are
proper to each, are divided in common to all the members of Christ, by
the Gift, which is the Holy Spirit. For each severally has not all, but some
have these and some have those; although all have the Gift itself by which
that which is proper to each is divided to Him, i.e. the Holy Spirit. For
elsewhere also, when he had mentioned many gifts, "All these," he says,
"worketh that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to each severally as
He will." And this word is found also in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where
it is written, "God also bearing witness both with signs and wonders, and
with divers miracles, and gifts7 of the Holy Ghost." And so here, when he
had said, "He ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, He gave gifts
to men," he says further, "But that He ascended, what is it but that He
also first descended into the lower parts of the earth? He who descended
is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that He might fill
all things. And He gave some apostles, some prophets, and some
evangelists, and some pastors and doctors." (This we see is the reason
why gifts are spoken of; because, as he says elsewhere, "Are all apostles?
are all prophets?" etc.) And here he has added, "For the perfecting of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the building up of the body of
Christ." This is the house which, as the Psalm sings, is built up after the
captivity;11 since the house of Christ, which house is called His Church, is
built up of those who have been rescued from the devil, by whom they
were held captive. But He Himself led this captivity captive, who
conquered the devil. And that he might not draw with him into eternal
punishment those who were to become the members of the Holy Head,

He bound him first by the bonds of righteousness, and then by those of
might. The devil himself, therefore, is called captivity, which He led
captive who ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men, or received gifts
in men.
35. And Peter the apostle, as we read in that canonical book, wherein the
Acts of the Apostles are recorded,—when the hearts of the Jews were
troubled as he spake of Christ, and they said, "Brethren, what shall we
do? tell us,"—said to them, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit." And we read likewise in the same
book, that Simon Magus desired to give money to the apostles, that he
might receive power from them, whereby the Holy Spirit might be given
by the laying on of his hands. And the same Peter said to him, "Thy
money perish with thee: because thou hast thought to purchase for
money the gift of God." And in another place of the same book, when
Peter was speaking to Cornelius, and to those who were with him, and
was announcing and preaching Christ, the Scripture says, "While Peter
was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell upon all them that
heard the word; and they of the circumcision that believed, as many as
came with Peter, were astonished, because that upon the Gentiles also the
gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out. For they heard them speak with
tongues, and magnify God." And when Peter afterwards was giving an
account to the brethren that were at Jerusalem of this act of his, that he
had baptized those who were not circumcised, because the Holy Spirit, to
cut the knot of the question, had come upon them before they were
baptized, and the brethren at Jerusalem were moved when they heard it,
he says, after the rest of his words, "And when I began to speak to them,
the Holy Spirit fell upon them, as upon us in the beginning. And I
remembered the word of the Lord, how He said, that John indeed
baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit. If,
therefore, He gave a like gift to them, as also to us who believed in the
Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could hinder God from giving to them
the Holy Spirit?" And there are many other testimonies of the
Scriptures, which unanimously attest that the Holy Spirit is the gift of
God, in so far as He is given to those who by Him love God. But it is too
long a task to collect them all. And what is enough to satisfy those who