SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether restitution must always be made to the

person from whom a thing has been taken?
Objection 1: It would seem that restitution need not always be made
to the person from whom a thing has been taken. For it is not lawful
to injure anyone. Now it would sometimes be injurious to the man
himself, or to others, were one to restore to him what has been taken
from him; if, for instance, one were to return a madman his sword.
Therefore restitution need not always be made to the person from
whom a thing has been taken.
Objection 2: Further, if a man has given a thing unlawfully, he does
not deserve to recover it. Now sometimes a man gives unlawfully
that which another accepts unlawfully, as in the case of the giver and
receiver who are guilty of simony. Therefore it is not always
necessary to make restitution to the person from whom one has
taken something.
Objection 3: Further, no man is bound to do what is impossible. Now
it is sometimes impossible to make restitution to the person from
whom a thing has been taken, either because he is dead, or because
he is too far away, or because he is unknown to us. Therefore
restitution need not always be made to the person from whom a
thing has been taken.
Objection 4: Further, we owe more compensation to one from whom
we have received a greater favor. Now we have received greater
favors from others (our parents for instance) than from a lender or
depositor. Therefore sometimes we ought to succor some other
person rather than make restitution to one from whom we have taken
something.
Objection 5: Further, it is useless to restore a thing which reverts to
the restorer by being restored. Now if a prelate has unjustly taken
something from the Church and makes restitution to the Church, it
reverts into his hands, since he is the guardian of the Church's
property. Therefore he ought not to restore to the Church from whom
he has taken: and so restitution should not always be made to the
person from whom something has been taken away
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 13:7): "Render . . . to all men their

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.6.

dues; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom."
I answer that, Restitution re-establishes the equality of commutative
justice, which equality consists in the equalizing of thing to thing, as
stated above (Article 2; Question 58, Article 10). Now this equalizing
of things is impossible, unless he that has less than his due receive
what is lacking to him: and for this to be done, restitution must be
made to the person from whom a thing has been taken.
Reply to Objection 1: When the thing to be restored appears to be
grievously injurious to the person to whom it is to be restored, or to
some other, it should not be restored to him there and then, because
restitution is directed to the good of the person to whom it is made,
since all possessions come under the head of the useful. Yet he who
retains another's property must not appropriate it, but must either
reserve it, that he may restore it at a fitting time, or hand it over to
another to keep it more securely.
Reply to Objection 2: A person may give a thing unlawfully in two
ways. First through the giving itself being illicit and against the law,
as is the case when a man gives a thing simoniacally. Such a man
deserves to lose what he gave, wherefore restitution should not be
made to him: and, since the receiver acted against the law in
receiving, he must not retain the price, but must use it for some
pious object. Secondly a man gives unlawfully, through giving for an
unlawful purpose, albeit the giving itself is not unlawful, as when a
woman receives payment for fornication: wherefore she may keep
what she has received. If, however, she has extorted overmuch by
fraud or deceit, she would be bound to restitution.
Reply to Objection 3: If the person to whom restitution is due is
unknown altogether, restitution must be made as far as possible, for
instance by giving an alms for his spiritual welfare (whether he be
dead or living): but not without previously making a careful inquiry
about his person. If the person to whom restitution is due be dead,
restitution should be made to his heir, who is looked upon as one
with him. If he be very far away, what is due to him should be sent to
him, especially if it be of great value and can easily be sent: else it
should be deposited in a safe place to be kept for him, and the owner
should be advised of the fact.
Reply to Objection 4: A man is bound, out of his own property, to