rise again? Wherefore He said to the sons of Zebedee, "It is not mine to give, but
it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared by my Father" [Mark 10:40],
yet He it is that judges. But in this passage He also establishes His genuine
sonship. For as the servants of His own Son, so will the Father receive them.

John 12:27
"Now is My soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour."
"But surely this is not the expression of one urging them to go even to
death." Nay, it is that of one greatly so urging them. For lest they should say, that
"He being exempt from mortal pains easily philosophizes on death, and exhorts
us being himself in no danger," He shows, that although feeling its agony, on
account of its profitableness He declines it not. But these things belong to the
Dispensation, not the Godhead. Wherefore He says, "Now is My soul troubled";
since if this be not the case, What connection has that which was spoken, and
His saying, "Father, save Me from this hour"? And so troubled, that He even
sought deliverance from death, if at least it were possible to escape. These were
the infirmities of His human nature.
2. "But," He says, "I have not what to say, when asking for deliverance."
"For for this cause came I unto this hour."
As though He had said, "Though we be confounded, though we be troubled,
let us not fly from death, since even now I though troubled do not speak of flying;
for it behooves to bear what is coming on. I say not, Deliver Me from this hour,"
but what?

John 12:28
"Father, glorify Your Name."
"Although My trouble urges Me to say this, yet I say the opposite, 'Glorify
Your Name,' that is, Lead Me henceforth to the Cross"; which greatly shows His
humanity, and a nature unwilling to die, but clinging to the present life, proving
that He was not exempt from human feelings. For as it is no blame to be hungry,
or to sleep, so neither is it to desire the present life; and Christ indeed had a body
pure from sin, yet not free from natural wants, for then it would not have been a
body. By these words also He taught something else. Of what kind is that? That
if ever we be in agony and dread, we even then start not back from that which is
set before us; and by saying, "Glorify Your Name" He shows that He dies for the
truth calling the action, "glory to God." And this fell out after the Crucifixion.
The world was about to be converted, to acknowledge the Name of God, and to
serve Him, not the Name of the Father only, but also that of the Son; yet still as
to this He is silent.
"There came therefore a Voice from Heaven, I have both glorified it, and
will glorify it again."
When had He "glorified it"? By what had been done before; and "I will
glorify it again" after the Cross. What then said Christ?

John 12:30
"This Voice came not because of Me, but for your sakes."
They thought that it thundered, or that an Angel spoke to Him. And how did
they think this? Was not the voice clear and distinct? It was, but it quickly flew
away from them as being of the grosser sort, carnal and slothful. And some of
them caught the sound only, others knew that the voice was articulate, but what
it meant, knew not. What says Christ? "This Voice came not because of Me, but
for your sakes." Why said He this? He said it, setting Himself against what they
continually asserted, that He was not of God. For He who was glorified by God,
how was He not from that God whose name by Him was glorified? Indeed for
this purpose the Voice came. Wherefore He says Himself, "This Voice came not
because of Me, but for your sakes," "not that I may learn by it anything of which
I am ignorant, (for I know all that belongs to the Father,) but for your sakes."
For when they said, "An Angel has spoken unto Him," or "It has thundered," and
gave not heed to Him, He says, "it was for your sakes," that even so ye might be
led to enquire what the words meant. But they, being excited, did not even so
enquire, though they heard that the matter related to them. For to one who knew
not wherefore it was uttered, the Voice naturally appeared indistinct. "The Voice
came for your sakes." Do you see that these lowly circumstances take place on
their account, not as though the Son needs help?