they which are approved may be made manifest, those among you who are such."
For neither when he is accusing does he lay them open, that he may not render
them more reckless; nor when praising, that he may not make them more
boastful; but he leaves both this expression and that in suspense , allowing each
man's own conscience to make the application of what he says.
Nor does he here seem to me to be comforting the poor only, but those also
who were not violating the custom. For it was likely that there were among them
also those that observed it.
And this is why he said, "I partly believe it." Justly then does he call these
"approved," who not only with the rest observed the custom, but even without
them kept this good law undisturbed. And he does this, studying by such praises
to render both others and these persons themselves more forward.
4. Then at last he adds the very form of offense. And what is it?

1 Corinthians 11:20
"When ye assemble yourselves together," says he, "it is not possible to eat
the Lord's Supper."
Do you see how effectually appealing to their shame, even already by way
of narrative he contrives to give them his counsel? "For the appearance of your
assembly," says he, "is different. It is one of love and brotherly affection. At least
one place receives you all, and you are together in one flock. But the Banquet,
when you come to that, bears no resemblance to the Assembly of worshippers."
And he said not, When ye come together, this is not to eat in common; "this is
not to feast with one another;" but otherwise again and much more fearfully he
reprimands them, saying, "it is not possible to eat the Lord's Supper," sending
them away now from this point to that evening on which Christ delivered the
awful Mysteries. Therefore also he called the early meal "a supper." For that
supper too had them all reclining at meat together: yet surely not so great was
the distance between the rich and the poor as between the Teacher and the
disciples. For that is infinite. And why say I the Teacher and the disciples? Think
of the interval between the Teacher and the traitor: nevertheless, the Lord
Himself both sat at meat with them and did not even cast him out, but both gave
him his portion of salt and made him partaker of the Mysteries.
Next he explains how "it is not possible to eat the Lord's Supper."

1 Corinthians 11:21
"For in your eating, each one takes before other his own supper," says he,
"and one is hungry, and another is drunken."
Perceivest thou how he intimates that they were disgracing themselves
rather? For that which is the Lord's, they make a private matter: so that
themselves are the first to suffer indignity, depriving their own table of its
greatest prerogative. How and in what manner? Because the Lord's Supper, i.e.
the Master's, ought to be common. For the property of the master belongs not to
this servant without belonging to that, but in common to all. So that by "the
Lord's" Supper he expresses this, the "community" of the feast. As if he had said,
"If it be your master's, as assuredly it is, you ought not to withdraw it as private,
but as belonging to your Lord and Master to set it in common before all. For this
is the meaning of, 'the Lord's.' But now thou dost not suffer it to be the Lord's,
not suffering it to be common but feasting by yourself." Wherefore also he goes
on to say,
"For each one takes before other his own supper." And he said not, "cuts
off," but "takes before," tacitly censuring them both for greediness and for
precipitancy. This at least the sequel also shows. For having said this, he added
again, "and one is hungry, and another is drunken," each of which showed a
want of moderation, both the craving and the excess. See also a second fault
again whereby those same persons are injured: the first, that they dishonor their
supper: the second, that they are greedy and drunken; and what is yet worse,
even when the poor are hungry. For what was intended to be set before all in
common, that these men fed on alone, and proceeded both to surfeiting and to
drunkenness. Wherefore neither did he say, "one is hungry, and another is
filled:" but, "is drunken." Now each of these, even by itself, is worthy of
censure: for it is a fault to be drunken even without despising the poor; and to