make satisfaction to a man. Therefore it is possible to make
satisfaction to God.
Further, there is due satisfaction when the punishment balances the
fault, since "justice is the same as counterpassion," as the
Pythagoreans said [Aristotle, Ethic. v, 5; SS, Question 61, Article 4].
Now punishment may equal the pleasure contained in a sin
committed. Therefore satisfaction can be made to God.
I answer that, Man becomes God's debtor in two ways; first, by
reason of favors received, secondly, by reason of sin committed:
and just as thanksgiving or worship or the like regard the debt for
favors received, so satisfaction regards the debt for sin committed.
Now in giving honor to one's parents or to the gods, as indeed the
Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 14), it is impossible to repay them
measure for measure, but it suffices that man repay as much as he
can, for friendship does not demand measure for measure, but what
is possible. Yet even this is equal somewhat, viz. according to
proportion, for as the debt due to God is, in comparison with God, so
is what man can do, in comparison with himself, so that in another
way the form of justice is preserved. It is the same as regards
satisfaction. Consequently man cannot make satisfaction to God if
"satis" [enough] denotes quantitative equality; but he can, if it
denote proportionate equality, as explained above, and as this
suffices for justice, so does it suffice for satisfaction.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as the offense derived a certain infinity
from the infinity of the Divine majesty, so does satisfaction derive a
certain infinity from the infinity of Divine mercy, in so far as it is
quickened by grace, whereby whatever man is able to repay
becomes acceptable. Others, however, say that the offense is infinite
as regards the aversion, and in this respect it is pardoned
gratuitously, but that it is finite as turning to a mutable good, in
which respect it is possible to make satisfaction for it. But this is not
to the point, since satisfaction does not answer to sin, except as this
is an offense against God, which is a matter, not of turning to a
creature but of turning away from God. Others again say that even as
regards the aversion it is possible to make satisfaction for sin in
virtue of Christ's merit, which was, in a way, infinite. And this comes
to the same as what we said before, since grace is given to believers
through faith in the Mediator. If, however, He were to give grace
otherwise, satisfaction would suffice in the way explained above.

Reply to Objection 2: Man, who was made to God's image, has a
certain share of liberty, in so far as he is master of his actions
through his free-will; so that, through acting by his free-will, he can
make satisfaction to God, for though it belongs to God, in so far as it
was bestowed on him by God, yet it was freely bestowed on him, that
he might be his own master, which cannot be said of a slave.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument proves that it is impossible to
make equivalent satisfaction to God, but not that it is impossible to
make sufficient satisfaction to Him. For though man owes God all
that he is able to give Him, yet it is not necessary for his salvation
that he should actually do the whole of what he is able to do, for it is
impossible for him, according to his present state of life, to put forth
his whole power into any one single thing, since he has to be heedful
about many things. And so his conduct is subject to a certain
measure, viz. the fulfillment of God's commandments, over and
above which he can offer something by way of satisfaction.
Reply to Objection 4: Though man cannot recover the time that is
past, he can in the time that follows make compensation for what he
should have done in the past, since the commandment did not exact
from him the fulfillment of his whole power, as stated above (ad 3).
Reply to Objection 5: Though original sin has less of the nature of
sin than actual sin has, yet it is a more grievous evil, because it is an
infection of human nature itself, so that, unlike actual sin, it could
not be expiated by the satisfaction of a mere man.