need of the good word of others, and fancy that you have not enough by
yourself, unless you receive the glory that comes of others? Do you not perceive,
pray, beside what I have said, that as you are an object of notice, and known to
every body, if you should commit a fault, you will have accusers unnumbered;
but if unknown, you will remain in security? Yes, a man may say, but then if I do
well I shall have admirers unnumbered. Now the fearful thing is, that it is not
only when you sin, but even when you do aright, that the disorder of vanity does
you mischief, in the former case subverting thousands, in the present bereaving
you entirely of your reward. It is then a sad thing, and replete with disgrace of
every kind, to be in love with glory even in civil matters. But when even in
spiritual you are in the same plight what excuse is there left remaining for you,
when you are not minded to yield God even as much honor as you have yourself
from your servants? For even the slave "looks to the eyes of his master" [Psalm
123:2], and the hireling to his employer, who is to pay him wages, and the
disciple to his master. But you do just the contrary. Having left the God that
hired you, even your Master, you look to your fellow-servants; and this knowing
that God remembers your well-doings even after this life, but man only for the
present. And when you have spectators assembled in Heaven, you are gathering
together spectators upon earth. And where the wrestler struggles, there he would
be honored; but thou, while your wrestling is above, art anxious to gain you a
crown below. And what can be worse than madness like this? But let us look, if
it seem proper, at the crowns also. For one is formed by haughtiness, and a
second by grudging against another, and a third by dissimulation and flattery,
another again by wealth, and another by servile obsequiousness. And like as
children at their childish play put crowns of grass upon one another, and many a
time laugh at him that is crowned behind his back; thus now also they that pass
their praises upon you, many a time joke by themselves at their putting the grass
upon us. And would it were grass only! But now the crown is laden with much
mischief, and ruins all our well-doings. Taking then the vileness of it into
consideration, flee from the damage entailed. For how many would you have to

praise you? A hundred? Or twice, or thrice, or four times as many? Or rather, if
you please, put them at ten times or twenty times as many, and let there be two
or four thousand, or if you will, even ten thousand to applaud you. Still these be
no better than so many daws cawing from above. Or rather taking the
assemblage of the angels into consideration, these will seem more vile than even
worms, and their good word of not so much solidity as a cobweb, or a smoke, or
a dream.
Hear then how Paul, who saw through these things thoroughly, is so far
from seeking after them, that he even deprecates them, in the words, "But God
forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of Christ." [Galatians 6:14] This
glory then be thou also emulous of, that you may not provoke the Master,
because in so doing you are insulting God, and not yourself alone. For if you
even were a painter, and had some pupil, and he were to omit showing you his
practice of the art, but set forth his painting publicly just to any body that
chanted to observe it, you would not take it quietly. But if this even with your
fellow-servants were an insult, how much more with the Master! But if you have
a mind to learn on other grounds to feel scorn for the thing, be of a lofty mind,
laugh at appearances, increase your love of real glory, be filled with a spiritual
temper, say to your soul as Paul did, "Do you not know that we shall judge
angels?" [1 Corinthians 6:3] and having by this roused it up, go on to rebuke it,
and say, You who judges the angels, will you let yourself be judged of offscourings, and be praised with dancers, and mimics, and gladiators, and horsedrivers? For these men do follow after applause of this sort. But do thou poise
your wing high above the din of these, and emulate that citizen of the wilderness,
John, and learn how he was above regarding the multitude, and did not turn him
to look at flatterers, but when he saw all the dwellers in Palestine poured forth
about him, and wondering, and astonished at him, he was not puffed up with
such honor as this, but rose up against them, and discoursing to his great
concourse as if to one youth, he thus rebuked them and said, "You serpents, you
generation of vipers!" [Matthew 3:7] Yet it was for him that they had run