that something might happen which you would not wish. This indeed he does
from his great love. For those who love suspect even what is safe, from their
exceeding warmth. But this is caused by their great temptations. For I said
indeed that we are appointed thereunto, but the excess of the temptations
alarmed me. Wherefore he has not said, I send him as condemning you, but
"when I could no longer forbear," which is rather an expression of love.
What means, "Lest by any means the tempter had tempted you"? Do you see
that to be shaken in afflictions proceeds from the devil, and from his seduction?
For when he cannot shake us ourselves, he takes another way, and shakes the
weaker sort through our means, which argues exceeding infirmity, and such as
admits of no excuse; as he did in the case of Job, having stirred up his wife,
"Speak some word against the Lord," she says, "and die." [Job 2:9, Septuagint]
See how he tempted her.
But wherefore has he not said, "shaken," but "tempted"? Because, he says, I
only suspected so much, as that you had been tempted. For he does not call his
temptation a wavering. For he who admits his attack is shaken. Strange! How
great is the affection of Paul! He did not regard afflictions, nor plots against him.
For I think that he then remained there, as Luke says, that "he abode in Greece
three months, when the Jews laid a plot against him." [Acts 20:3]
His concern therefore was not for his own dangers, but for his disciples. Do
you see how he surpassed every natural parent? For we in our afflictions and
dangers lose the remembrance of all. But he so feared and trembled for his
children, that he sent to them Timothy, whom alone he had for his consolation,
his companion and fellow-laborer, and him too in the very midst of dangers.
"And our labor," he says, "should be in vain." Wherefore! For even if they
were turned aside, it was not through your fault, not through your negligence.
But nevertheless, though this were the case, I think, from my great love of the
brethren, that my labor had been rendered vain.
"Lest by any means the tempter had tempted you." But he tempts, not
knowing whether he shall overthrow. Does he then, even though he knows not,

yet assail us, and do we, who know that we shall completely overcome him, not
watch? But that he does attack us, though he knows not, he showed in the case of
Job. For that evil demon said to God, "Have You not made a hedge about his
things within, and his things without? Take away his goods, and surely he will
bless You to Your face." [Job 1:10-11, Septuagint] He makes trial; if he sees
anything weak, he makes an attack, if strong, he desists. "And our labor," he
says, "be in vain." Let us all hear, how Paul labored. He does not say work, but
"labor"; he does not say, and you be lost, but "our labor." So that even if
anything had happened, it would be happening with some reason. But that it did
not happen was a great wonder. These things indeed we expected, he says, but
the contrary happened. For not only did we receive from you no addition to our
affliction but even consolation.
"But when Timothy came even now unto us, and brought us glad tidings of
your faith and love." "Brought us glad tidings," he says. Do you see the
excessive joy of Paul? He does not say, brought us word, but "brought us glad
tidings." So great a good did he think their steadfastness and love. For it was
necessary, the one remaining firm, that the other also must be steadfast. And he
rejoiced in their love, because it was a sign of their faith. "And that you have," he
says, "good remembrance of us always, longing to see us, even as we also to see
you." That is, with praises. Not when we were present, nor when we were
working miracles, but even now, when we are far off, and are scourged, and are
suffering numberless evils, "you have good remembrance of us." Hear how
disciples are admired, who have good remembrance of their teachers, how they
are called blessed. Let us imitate these. For we benefit ourselves, not those who
are loved by us. "Longing to see us," he says, "as we also to see you." And this
too cheered them; for to him who loves, to perceive that the beloved person
knows that he is beloved, is a great comfort and consolation.
"For this cause, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our distress
and affliction through your faith. For now we live if you stand fast in the Lord."
What is comparable to Paul, who thought the salvation of his neighbors was his