Homily 86 on the Gospel of John
John 20:10-11
"Then the disciples went away again unto their own home. But Mary stood
without at the sepulcher, weeping."
1. Full of feeling somehow is the female sex, and more inclined to pity. I
say this, lest you should wonder how it could be that Mary wept bitterly at the
tomb, while Peter was in no way so affected. For, "The disciples," it says, "went
away unto their own home"; but she stood shedding tears. Because hers was a
feeble nature, and she as yet knew not accurately the account of the
Resurrection; whereas they having seen the linen clothes and believed, departed
to their own homes in astonishment. And wherefore went they not straightway to
Galilee, as had been commanded them before the Passion? They waited for the
others, perhaps, and besides they were yet at the height of their amazement.
These then went their way: but she stood at the place, for, as I have said, even
the sight of the tomb tended greatly to comfort her. At any rate, you see her, the
more to ease her grief, stooping down, and desiring to behold the place where
the body lay. And therefore she received no small reward for this her great zeal.
For what the disciples saw not, this saw the woman first, Angels sitting, the one
at the feet, the other at the head, in white; even the dress was full of much
radiance and joy. Since the mind of the woman was not sufficiently elevated to
accept the Resurrection from the proof of the napkins, something more takes
place, she beholds something more; Angels sitting in shining garments, so as to
raise her thus awhile from her passionate sorrow, and to comfort her. But they
said nothing to her concerning the Resurrection, yet is she gently led forward in
this doctrine. She saw countenances bright and unusual; she saw shining
garments, she heard a sympathizing voice. For what says (the Angel)?

John 20:13
"Woman, why do you weep?"
By all these circumstances, as though a door was being opened for her, she
was led little by little to the knowledge of the Resurrection. And the manner of
their sitting invited her to question them, for they showed that they knew what
had taken place; on which account they did not sit together either, but apart from
one another. For because it was not likely that she would dare at once to question
them, both by questioning her, and by the manner of their sitting, they bring her
to converse. What then says she? She speaks very warmly and affectionately;
"They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid Him."
"What do you say? Do you not know yet anything concerning the
Resurrection, but do you still form fancies about His being laid ?" Do you see
how she had not yet received the sublime doctrine?

John 20:14
"And when she had thus said, she turned herself back."
And by what kind of consequence is it, that she having spoken to them, and
not having yet heard anything from them, turned back? Methinks that while she
was speaking, Christ suddenly appearing behind her, struck the Angels with awe;
and that they having beheld their Ruler, showed immediately by their bearing,
their look, their movements, that they saw the Lord; and this drew the woman's
attention, and caused her to turn herself backwards. To them then He appeared
on this wise, but not so to the woman, in order not at the first sight to terrify her,
but in a meaner and ordinary form, as is clear from her supposing that He was
the gardener. It was meet to lead one of so lowly a mind to high matters, not all
at once, but gently. He therefore in turn asks her,