grace, you are guilty not only of envy and insolence, but of extreme folly, and
may be liable to all the severest torments; for you have planted within yourself
the root of all evils, pride.
Wherefore a wise man has said, "Pride is the beginning of sin" [Sirach
10:13]: that is, its root, its source, its mother. By this the first created was
banished from that happy abode: by this the devil who deceived him had fallen
from that height of dignity; from which that accursed one, knowing that the
nature of the sin was sufficient to cast down even from heaven itself, came this
way when he labored to bring down Adam from such high honor. For having
puffed him up with the promise that he should be as a God, so he broke him
down, and cast him down into the very gulfs of hell. Because nothing so
alienates men from the lovingkindness of God, and gives them over to the fire of
the pit, as the tyranny of pride. For when this is present with us, our whole life
becomes impure, even though we fulfill temperance, chastity, fasting, prayer,
almsgiving, anything. For, "Every one," says the wise man, "that is proud in
heart is an abomination to the Lord." [Proverbs 16:5] Let us then restrain this
swelling of the soul, let us cut up by the roots this lump of pride, if at least we
would wish to be clean, and to escape the punishment appointed for the devil.
For that the proud must fall under the same punishment as that (wicked) one,
hear Paul declare; "Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
judgment, and the snare of the devil." What is "the judgment"? He means, into
the same "condemnation," the same punishment. How then does he say, that a
man may avoid this dreadful thing? By reflecting upon his own nature, upon the
number of his sins, upon the greatness of the torments in that place, upon the
transitory nature of the things which seem bright in this world, differing in
nothing from grass, and more fading than the flowers of spring. If we continually
stir within ourselves these considerations, and keep in mind those who have
walked most upright, the devil, though he strive ten thousand ways, will not be
able to lift us up, nor even to trip us at all. May the God who is the God of the
humble, the good and merciful God, grant both to you and me a broken and

humbled heart, so shall we be enabled easily to order the rest aright, to the glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory forever and ever. Amen.

Homily 10 on the Gospel of John
John 1:11
"He came unto His own, and His own received Him not."
1. Beloved, God being loving towards man and beneficent, does and
contrives all things in order that we may shine in virtue, and as desiring that we
be well approved by Him. And to this end He draws no one by force or
compulsion: but by persuasion and benefits He draws all that will, and wins
them to Himself. Wherefore when He came, some received Him, and others
received Him not. For He will have no unwilling, no forced domestic, but all of
their own will and choice, and grateful to Him for their service. Men, as needing
the ministry of servants, keep many in that state even against their will, by the
law of ownership; but God, being without wants, and not standing in need of
anything of ours, but doing all only for our salvation makes us absolute in this
matter, and therefore lays neither force nor compulsion on any of those who are
unwilling. For He looks only to our advantage: and to be drawn unwilling to a
service like this is the same as not serving at all.
"Why then," says one, "does He punish those who will not listen to Him,
and why has He threatened hell to those who endure not His commands?"
Because, being Good exceedingly, He cares even for those who obey Him not,
and withdraws not from them who start back and flee from Him. But when we
had rejected the first way of His beneficence, and had refused to come by the
path of persuasion and kind treatment, then He brought in upon us the other way,
that of correction and punishments; most bitter indeed, but still necessary, when
the former is disregarded. Now lawgivers also appoint many and grievous
penalties against offenders, and yet we feel no aversion to them for this; we even
honor them the more on account of the punishments they have enacted, and