excommunication, but not if they did so afterwards.
Some understand this exception to apply in the opposite way, viz.
that the master can communicate with his subjects: while others
hold the contrary. At any rate it is lawful for them to communicate
with others in matters wherein they are under an obligation to them,
for just as subjects are bound to serve their master, so is the master
bound to look after his subjects. Again certain cases are excepted;
as when the fact of the excommunication is unknown, or in the case
of strangers or travelers in the country of those who are
excommunicated, for they are allowed to buy from them, or to
receive alms from them. Likewise if anyone were to see an
excommunicated person in distress: for then he would be bound by
the precept of charity to assist him. These are all contained in the
following line: "Utility, law, lowliness, ignorance of fact, necessity,"
where "utility" refers to salutary words, "law" to marriage,
"lowliness" to subjection. The others need no explanation.
Reply to Objection 1: Corporal matters are subordinate to spiritual
matters. Wherefore the power which extends to spiritual things, can
also extend to matters touching the body: even as the art which
considers the end commands in matters ordained to the end.
Reply to Objection 2: In a case where one is bound by the precept of
charity to hold communication, the prohibition ceases, as is clear
from what has been said.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a person incurs excommunication for

communicating with one who is excommunicated?
Objection 1: It would seem that a person does not incur
excommunication for communicating with one who is
excommunicated. For a heathen or a Jew is more separated from the
Church than a person who is excommunicated. But one does not
incur excommunication for communicating with a heathen or a Jew.
Neither, therefore, does one for communicating with an
excommunicated Christian.
Objection 2: Further, if a man incurs excommunication for
communicating with an excommunicated person, for the same
reason a third would incur excommunication for communicating with
him, and thus one might go on indefinitely, which would seem
absurd. Therefore one does not incur excommunication for
communicating with one who is excommunicated.
On the contrary, An excommunicated person is banished from
communion. Therefore whoever communicates with him leaves the
communion of the Church: and hence he seems to be
excommunicated.
I answer that, A person may incur excommunication in two ways.
First, so that the excommunication includes both himself and
whosoever communicates with him: and then, without any doubt,
whoever communicates with him, incurs a major excommunication.
Secondly, so that the excommunication is simply pronounced on
him; and then a man may communicate with him either in his crime,
by counsel, help or favor, in which case again he incurs the major
excommunication, or he may communicate with him in other things
by speaking to him, greeting him, or eating with him, in which case
he incurs the minor excommunication.
Reply to Objection 1: The Church has no intention of correcting
unbelievers as well as the faithful who are under her care: hence she
does not sever those, whom she excommunicates, from the
fellowship of unbelievers, as she does from the communion of the
faithful over whom she exercises a certain power.
Reply to Objection 2: It is lawful to hold communion with one who