Reply to Objection 4: The conformity between the angels and Christ
as God is not such as suffices for the notion of a perfect marriage,
since so far are they from agreeing in species that there is still an
infinite distance between them.
Reply to Objection 5: Not even is Christ properly called the Head of
the angels, if we consider the head as requiring conformity of nature
with the members. We must observe, however, that although the
head and the other members are parts of an individual of one
species, if we consider each one by itself, it is not of the same
species as another member, for a hand is another specific part from
the head. Hence, speaking of the members in themselves, the only
conformity required among them is one of proportion, so that one
receive from another, and one serve another. Consequently the
conformity between God and the angels suffices for the notion of
head rather than for that of bridegroom.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether three dowries of the soul are suitably

assigned?
Objection 1: It would seem unfitting to assign to the soul three
dowries, namely, "vision," "love" and "fruition." For the soul is
united to God according to the mind wherein is the image of the
Trinity in respect of the memory, understanding, and will. Now love
regards the will, and vision the understanding. Therefore there
should be something corresponding to the memory, since fruition
regards not the memory but the will.
Objection 2: Further, the beatific dowries are said to correspond to
the virtues of the way, which united us to God: and these are faith,
hope, and charity, whereby God Himself is the object. Now love
corresponds to charity, and vision to faith. Therefore there should be
something corresponding to hope, since fruition corresponds rather
to charity.
Objection 3: Further, we enjoy God by love and vision only, since
"we are said to enjoy those things which we love for their own sake,"
as Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 4). Therefore fruition should
not be reckoned a distinct dowry from love.
Objection 4: Further, comprehension is required for the perfection of
beatitude: "So run that you may comprehend" (1 Cor. 9:24).
Therefore we should reckon a fourth dowry
Objection 5: Further, Anselm says (De Simil. xlviii) that the following
pertain to the soul's beatitude: "wisdom, friendship, concord, power,
honor, security, joy": and consequently the aforesaid dowries are
reckoned unsuitably.
Objection 6: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxii) that "in that
beatitude God will be seen unendingly, loved without wearying,
praised untiringly." Therefore praise should be added to the
aforesaid dowries.
Objection 7: Further, Boethius reckons five things pertaining to
beatitude (De Consol. iii) and these are: Sufficiency which wealth
offers, joy which pleasure offers, celebrity which fame offers,
security which power offers, reverence which dignity offers.