FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.4.

appetitive power. Now the moral virtues are habits, whereby the
powers of appetite are disposed to obey reason promptly. Therefore
the gifts of the Holy Ghost are habits whereby man is perfected to
obey readily the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: Gregory solves this objection (Moral. ii, 27) by
saying that "by those gifts without which one cannot obtain life, the
Holy Ghost ever abides in all the elect, but not by His other gifts."
Now the seven gifts are necessary for salvation, as stated above
(Article 2). Therefore, with regard to them, the Holy Ghost ever
abides in holy men.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument holds, in the case of an
instrument which has no faculty of action, but only of being acted
upon. But man is not an instrument of that kind; for he is so acted
upon, by the Holy Ghost, that he also acts himself, in so far as he
has a free-will. Therefore he needs a habit.
Reply to Objection 3: Prophecy is one of those gifts which are for the
manifestation of the Spirit, not for the necessity of salvation: hence
the comparison fails.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are

suitably enumerated?
Objection 1: It would seem that seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are
unsuitably enumerated. For in that enumeration four are set down
corresponding to the intellectual virtues, viz. wisdom,
understanding, knowledge, and counsel, which corresponds to
prudence; whereas nothing is set down corresponding to art, which
is the fifth intellectual virtue. Moreover, something is included
corresponding to justice, viz. piety, and something corresponding to
fortitude, viz. the gift of fortitude; while there is nothing to
correspond to temperance. Therefore the gifts are enumerated
insufficiently.
Objection 2: Further, piety is a part of justice. But no part of fortitude
is assigned to correspond thereto, but fortitude itself. Therefore
justice itself, and not piety, ought to have been set down.
Objection 3: Further, the theological virtues, more than any, direct us
to God. Since, then, the gifts perfect man according as he is moved
by God, it seems that some gifts, corresponding to the theological
virtues, should have been included.
Objection 4: Further, even as God is an object of fear, so is He of
love, of hope, and of joy. Now love, hope, and joy are passions
condivided with fear. Therefore, as fear is set down as a gift, so
ought the other three.
Objection 5: Further, wisdom is added in order to direct
understanding; counsel, to direct fortitude; knowledge, to direct
piety. Therefore, some gift should have been added for the purpose
of directing fear. Therefore the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are
unsuitably enumerated.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Holy Writ (Is. 11:2,3).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), the gifts are habits
perfecting man so that he is ready to follow the promptings of the
Holy Ghost, even as the moral virtues perfect the appetitive powers
so that they obey the reason. Now just as it is natural for the
appetitive powers to be moved by the command of reason, so it is