SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.6.

reference to the ordering of the means to the end. This ordinance, as
to its essence, is in the reason itself from which it issues, but by
participation it is in the appetite ordered by the reason; and this
ordinance is the effect of justice, especially of legal justice. Now
humility makes a man a good subject to ordinance of all kinds and in
all matters; while every other virtue has this effect in some special
matter. Therefore after the theological virtues, after the intellectual
virtues which regard the reason itself, and after justice, especially
legal justice, humility stands before all others.
Reply to Objection 1: Humility is not set before justice, but before
that justice which is coupled with pride, and is no longer a virtue;
even so, on the other hand, sin is pardoned through humility: for it is
said of the publican (Lk. 18:14) that through the merit of his humility
"he went down into his house justified." Hence Chrysostom says [De
incompr. Nat. Dei, Hom. v]: "Bring me a pair of two-horse chariots: in
the one harness pride with justice, in the other sin with humility: and
you will see that sin outrunning justice wins not by its own strength,
but by that of humility: while you will see the other pair beaten, not
by the weakness of justice, but by the weight and size of pride."
Reply to Objection 2: Just as the orderly assembly of virtues is, by
reason of a certain likeness, compared to a building, so again that
which is the first step in the acquisition of virtue is likened to the
foundation, which is first laid before the rest of the building. Now the
virtues are in truth infused by God. Wherefore the first step in the
acquisition of virtue may be understood in two ways. First by way of
removing obstacles: and thus humility holds the first place,
inasmuch as it expels pride, which "God resisteth," and makes man
submissive and ever open to receive the influx of Divine grace.
Hence it is written (James 4:6): "God resisteth the proud, and giveth
grace to the humble." In this sense humility is said to be the
foundation of the spiritual edifice. Secondly, a thing is first among
virtues directly, because it is the first step towards God. Now the
first step towards God is by faith, according to Heb. 11:6, "He that
cometh to God must believe." In this sense faith is the foundation in
a more excellent way than humility.
Reply to Objection 3: To him that despises earthly things, heavenly
things are promised: thus heavenly treasures are promised to those
who despise earthly riches, according to Mt. 6:19,20, "Lay not up to
yourselves treasures on earth . . . but lay up to yourselves treasures
in heaven." Likewise heavenly consolations are promised to those

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.6.

who despise worldly joys, according to Mt. 4:5, "Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall be comforted." In the same way spiritual
uplifting is promised to humility, not that humility alone merits it, but
because it is proper to it to despise earthly uplifting. Wherefore
Augustine says (De Poenit. [Serm. cccli]): "Think not that he who
humbles himself remains for ever abased, for it is written: 'He shall
be exalted.' And do not imagine that his exaltation in men's eyes is
effected by bodily uplifting."
Reply to Objection 4: The reason why Christ chiefly proposed
humility to us, was because it especially removes the obstacle to
man's spiritual welfare consisting in man's aiming at heavenly and
spiritual things, in which he is hindered by striving to become great
in earthly things. Hence our Lord, in order to remove an obstacle to
our spiritual welfare, showed by giving an example of humility, that
outward exaltation is to be despised. Thus humility is, as it were, a
disposition to man's untrammeled access to spiritual and divine
goods. Accordingly as perfection is greater than disposition, so
charity, and other virtues whereby man approaches God directly, are
greater than humility.