22. Let us not moralize on these things here only. For this temporary
admonition does not suffice to extirpate the whole evil; but at home also, let the
husband hear of these things from the wife, and the wife from the husband. And
let there be a kind of rivalry among all in endeavouring to gain precedence in the
fulfilment of this law; and let him who is in advance, and has amended his
conduct, reproach him who is still loitering behind; to the end that he may stir
him up the more by these gibes. He who is deficient, and has not yet amended
his conduct, let him look at him who has outstripped him, and strive with
emulation to come up with him quickly. If we take advice on these points, and
are anxiously concerned about them, our other affairs will speedily be well
adjusted. Be thou solicitous about God's business, and he will take care of yours!
And do not say to me, "What if any one should impose upon us the necessity of
taking oaths? What if he should not believe us?" For assuredly, where a law is
transgressed, it is improper to make mention of necessity; forasmuch as there is
but one necessity which cannot be dispensed with, viz. that of not offending
God! This, however, I say further; cut off in the meantime superfluous oaths,
those that are taken uselessly, and without any necessity; those to your own
family, those to your friends, those to your servants; and should you take away
these, you will have no further need of me for the others. For the very mouth that
has been well disciplined to dread and to avoid the frequent oath, should any one
constrain it a thousand times, would never consent to relapse again into the same
habit. On the contrary, as now, with much labor and vast importunity, by
alarming, threatening, exhorting, and counselling, we have scarcely been able to
bring it over to a different habit, so in that case, although any one were to impose
ever so great necessity, he could not possibly persuade to a transgression of this
law. And as a person would never choose to take a particular poison, however
urgent the necessity might be, so neither would he to utter an oath!
23. Should this amendment then take place, it will be an encouragement and
inducement to the attainment of the remaining parts of virtue. For he who has
not accomplished anything at all becomes listless, and quickly falls; but he who

is conscious with himself that he has fulfilled at least one precept, coming by
this to have a good hope, will go on with greater alacrity towards the rest; so
that, after he has reached one, he will presently come to another; and will not
halt until he has attained the crown of all. For if with regard to wealth, the more
any one obtains of it, the more he desires, much rather may this be seen with
reference to spiritual attainments. Therefore I hasten, and am urgent that this
work may take its commencement, and that the foundation of virtue may be laid
in your souls. We pray and beseech, that you will remember these words, not
only at the present time, but also at home, and in the market, and wheresoever ye
pass your time. Oh! That it were possible for me familiarly to converse with
you! then this long harangue of mine would have been unnecessary. But now
since this may not be, instead of me, remember my words: and while you are
sitting at table, suppose me to enter, and to be standing beside you, and dinning
into you the things I now say to you in this place. And wheresoever there may be
any discourse concerning me among you, above all things remember this
precept, and render me this recompense for my love toward you. If I see that you
have fulfilled it, I have received my full return, and have obtained a sufficient
recompense for my labours. In order then that you may both render us the more
active, and that yourselves too may be in the enjoyment of a good hope; and may
provide for the accomplishment of the remaining precepts with greater facility;
treasure up this precept in your souls with much care, and you will then
understand the benefit of this admonition. And since a vestment broidered with
gold is a beautiful and conspicuous object, but seems much more so to us when
it is worn upon our own person; thus also the precepts of God are beautiful when
being praised, but appear far more lovely when they are rightly practised. For
now indeed ye commend what is spoken during a brief moment of time, but if
you reduce it to practice, you will alike commend both yourselves and us all day
long, and all your lives long. And this is not the grand point, that we shall praise
one another; but that God will accept us; and not only accept us, but will also
reward us with those gifts that are great and unspeakable! Of which may we all