SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.3.

required, not for its own sake, but on account of the manifestation of
the intelligible truth. Wherefore prophecy is all the more excellent
according as it needs it less.
Reply to Objection 3: The fact that a particular predicate is applicable
to one thing and less properly to another, does not prevent this latter
from being simply better than the former: thus the knowledge of the
blessed is more excellent than the knowledge of the wayfarer,
although faith is more properly predicated of the latter knowledge,
because faith implies an imperfection of knowledge. In like manner
prophecy implies a certain obscurity, and remoteness from the
intelligible truth; wherefore the name of prophet is more properly
applied to those who see by imaginary vision. And yet the more
excellent prophecy is that which is conveyed by intellectual vision,
provided the same truth be revealed in either case. If, however, the
intellectual light be divinely infused in a person, not that he may
know some supernatural things, but that he may be able to judge,
with the certitude of divine truth, of things that can be known by
human reason, such intellectual prophecy is beneath that which is
conveyed by an imaginary vision leading to a supernatural truth. It
was this kind of prophecy that all those had who are included in the
ranks of the prophets, who moreover were called prophets for the
special reason that they exercised the prophetic calling officially.
Hence they spoke as God's representatives, saying to the people:
"Thus saith the Lord": but not so the authors of the "sacred
writings," several of whom treated more frequently of things that can
be known by human reason, not in God's name, but in their own, yet
with the assistance of the Divine light withal.
Reply to Objection 4: In the present life the enlightenment by the
divine ray is not altogether without any veil of phantasms, because
according to his present state of life it is unnatural to man not to
understand without a phantasm. Sometimes, however, it is sufficient
to have phantasms abstracted in the usual way from the senses
without any imaginary vision divinely vouchsafed, and thus
prophetic vision is said to be without imaginary vision.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the degrees of prophecy can be

distinguished according to the imaginary vision?
Objection 1: It would seem that the degrees of prophecy cannot be
distinguished according to the imaginary vision. For the degrees of a
thing bear relation to something that is on its own account, not on
account of something else. Now, in prophecy, intellectual vision is
sought on its own account, and imaginary vision on account of
something else, as stated above (Article 2, ad 2). Therefore it would
seem that the degrees of prophecy are distinguished not according
to imaginary, but only according to intellectual, vision.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly for one prophet there is one degree
of prophecy. Now one prophet receives revelation through various
imaginary visions. Therefore a difference of imaginary visions does
not entail a difference of prophecy.
Objection 3: Further, according to a gloss [Cassiodorus, super
Prolog. Hieron. in Psalt.], prophecy consists of words, deeds,
dreams, and visions. Therefore the degrees of prophecy should not
be distinguished according to imaginary vision, to which vision and
dreams pertain, rather than according to words and deeds.
On the contrary, The medium differentiates the degrees of
knowledge: thus science based on direct ["Propter quid"] proofs is
more excellent than science based on indirect ["Quia"] premises or
than opinion, because it comes through a more excellent medium.
Now imaginary vision is a kind of medium in prophetic knowledge.
Therefore the degrees of prophecy should be distinguished
according to imaginary vision.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 173, Article 2), the prophecy
wherein, by the intelligible light, a supernatural truth is revealed
through an imaginary vision, holds the mean between the prophecy
wherein a supernatural truth is revealed without imaginary vision,
and that wherein through the intelligible light and without an
imaginary vision, man is directed to know or do things pertaining to
human conduct. Now knowledge is more proper to prophecy than is
action; wherefore the lowest degree of prophecy is when a man, by
an inward instinct, is moved to perform some outward action. Thus it
is related of Samson (Judges 15:14) that "the Spirit of the Lord came