Reply to Objection 1: When consent is expressed in words of the
present tense, not only are the words actually present, but consent
is directed to the present, so that they coincide in point of time; but
when consent is given in words of the future tense, although the
words are actually present, the consent is directed to a future time,
and hence they do not coincide in point of time. For this reason the
comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 2: Even in other contracts, a man who uses words
referring to the future, does not transfer the power over his property
to another person---for instance if he were to say "I will give thee"--but only when he uses words indicative of the present.
Reply to Objection 3: In the vow of religious profession it is not the
spiritual marriage itself that is expressed in words which refer to the
future, but an act of the spiritual marriage, namely obedience or
observance of the rule. If, however, a man vow spiritual marriage in
the future, it is not a spiritual marriage, for a man does not become a
monk by taking such a vow, but promises to become one.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether, in the absence of inward consent, a

marriage is made by consent given in words of the present?
Objection 1: It would seem that even in the absence of inward
consent a marriage is made by consent expressed in words of the
present. For "fraud and deceit should benefit no man," according to
the law (cap. Ex Tenore, De Rescrip., cap. Si Vir, De cognat. spir.).
Now he who gives consent in words without consenting in heart
commits a fraud. Therefore he should not benefit by it, through being
released of the bond of marriage.
Objection 2: Further, the mental consent of one person cannot be
known to another, except in so far as it is expressed in words. If then
the expression of the words is not enough, and inward consent is
required in both parties, neither of them will be able to know that he
is truly married to the other; and consequently whenever he uses
marriage he will commit fornication.
Objection 3: Further, if a man is proved to have consented to take a
certain woman to wife in words of the present tense, he is compelled
under pain of excommunication to take her as his wife, even though
he should say that he was wanting in mental consent,
notwithstanding that afterwards he may have contracted marriage
with another woman by words expressive of consent in the present.
But this would not be the case if mental consent were requisite for
marriage. Therefore it is not required.
On the contrary, Innocent III says in a Decretal (cap. Tua Nos, De
Spons. et matr.) in reference to this case: "Other things cannot
complete the marriage bond in the absence of consent."
Further, intention is necessary in all the sacraments. Now he who
consents not in his heart has no intention of contracting marriage;
and therefore he does not contract a marriage.
I answer that, The outward cleansing stands in the same relation to
baptism as the expression of words to this sacrament, as stated
above (Article 2). Wherefore just as were a person to receive the
outward cleansing, with the intention, not of receiving the
sacrament, but of acting in jest or deceit, he would not be baptized;
so, too, expression of words without inward consent makes no