SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.11.

Reply to Objection 2: The enumeration referred to, includes those
sins which are species of lust by their very nature: whereas sacrilege
is a species of lust in so far as it is directed to another vice as its
end, and may coincide with the various species of lust. For unlawful
intercourse between persons mutually united by spiritual
relationship, is a sacrilege after the manner of incest. Intercourse
with a virgin consecrated to God, inasmuch as she is the spouse of
Christ, is sacrilege resembling adultery. If the maiden be under her
father's authority, it will be spiritual seduction; and if force be
employed it will be spiritual rape, which kind of rape even the civil
law punishes more severely than others. Thus the Emperor Justinian
says [Cod. i, iii de Episc. et Cler. 5]: "If any man dare, I will not say to
rape, but even to tempt a consecrated virgin with a view to marriage,
he shall be liable to capital punishment."
Reply to Objection 3: Sacrilege is committed on a consecrated thing.
Now a consecrated thing is either a consecrated person, who is
desired for sexual intercourse, and thus it is a kind of lust, or it is
desired for possession, and thus it is a kind of injustice. Sacrilege
may also come under the head of anger, for instance, if through
anger an injury be done to a consecrated person. Again, one may
commit a sacrilege by partaking gluttonously of sacred food.
Nevertheless, sacrilege is ascribed more specially to lust which is
opposed to chastity for the observance of which certain persons are
specially consecrated.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether the unnatural vice is a species of lust?

Objection 1: It would seem that the unnatural vice is not a species of
lust. For no mention of the vice against nature is made in the
enumeration given above (Article 1, Objection 1). Therefore it is not a
species of lust.
Objection 2: Further, lust is contrary to virtue; and so it is comprised
under vice. But the unnatural vice is comprised not under vice, but
under bestiality, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 5).
Therefore the unnatural vice is not a species of lust.
Objection 3: Further, lust regards acts directed to human generation,
as stated above (Question 153, Article 2): Whereas the unnatural vice
concerns acts from which generation cannot follow. Therefore the
unnatural vice is not a species of lust.
On the contrary, It is reckoned together with the other species of lust
(2 Cor. 12:21) where we read: "And have not done penance for the
uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness," where a gloss
says: "Lasciviousness, i.e., unnatural lust."
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 6,9) wherever there occurs a
special kind of deformity whereby the venereal act is rendered
unbecoming, there is a determinate species of lust. This may occur
in two ways: First, through being contrary to right reason, and this is
common to all lustful vices; secondly, because, in addition, it is
contrary to the natural order of the venereal act as becoming to the
human race: and this is called "the unnatural vice." This may happen
in several ways. First, by procuring pollution, without any
copulation, for the sake of venereal pleasure: this pertains to the sin
of "uncleanness" which some call "effeminacy." Secondly, by
copulation with a thing of undue species, and this is called
"bestiality." Thirdly, by copulation with an undue sex, male with
male, or female with female, as the Apostle states (Rm. 1:27): and
this is called the "vice of sodomy." Fourthly, by not observing the
natural manner of copulation, either as to undue means, or as to
other monstrous and bestial manners of copulation.
Reply to Objection 1: There we enumerated the species of lust that
are not contrary to human nature: wherefore the unnatural vice was