possible for one in this life to understand those same pure spirits, and consequently by
seeing [in his mind's eye] those pure spirits he would share in the mode of that
knowledge whereby a pure spirit, understanding itself, understands God." I need hardly
remind the reader that St Thomas himself rejects this notion, and is, I think, mistaken in
attributing it to Averroes.

## CHAPTER XLVI--That the Soul in this life does not understand itself by itself
AN apparent difficulty may be alleged against what has been said from some words of
Augustine, which require careful treatment. He says (De Trinitate, IX, iii): "As the mind
gathers knowledge of corporeal things by the senses of the body, so of incorporeal
things by itself: therefore it knows itself by itself, because itself is incorporeal." By these
words it appears that our mind understands itself by itself, and, understanding itself,
understands separately subsistent intelligences, or pure spirits, which would militate
against what has been shown above. But it is clear that such is not the mind of
Augustine. For he says (De Trinitate, X, ix, 12) of the soul seeking knowledge of itself:
"Let it not then seek to find (cernere) itself as though it were absent, but let its care be to
discern (discernere) itself as it is present: let it not observe itself as though it did not
know itself but let it distinguish itself from that other thing which it has mistaken for
itself." Whence he gives us to understand that the soul of itself knows itself as present,
but not as distinct from other things; and therefore he says (De Trin. X, x) that some
have erred in not distinguishing the soul from things that are different from it. But by the
knowledge of a thing in its essence the thing is known as distinct from other things:
hence definition, which marks the essence of a thing, distinguishes the thing defined
from all other things. Augustine then did not mean that the soul of itself knows its own
essence. So then, according to the thought of Augustine, our mind of itself knows itself,
inasmuch as it knows concerning itself that it exists: for by the very perceiving of itself to
act it perceives itself to be. But it acts of itself. Therefore of itself it knows concerning
itself that it exists.
1. But it cannot be said that the soul of itself knows concerning itself what it essentially
is. For a cognitive faculty comes to be actually cognisant by there being in it the object
which is known. If the object is in it potentially, it knows potentially: if the object is in it
actually, it is actually cognisant: if in an intermediate way, it is habitually cognisant. But
the soul is always present to itself actually, and never potentially or habitually only. If
then the soul of itself knows itself by its essence, it must ever have an intellectual view
of itself, what it essentially is, which clearly is not the case.
2 and 3. If the soul of itself knows itself in its essence, every man, having a soul, knows
the essence of the soul: which clearly is not the case, for many men have thought the
soul to be this or that body, and some have taken it for a number or harmony.
So then, by knowing itself, the soul is led to know concerning separately subsistent
intelligences the fact of their existence, but not what they are essentially, which would
mean understanding their substances. For whereas we know, either by demonstration
or by faith, concerning these pure spirits that they are intelligent subsistent beings, in
neither way could we gather this knowledge but for the fact that our soul knows from
itself the meaning of intelligent being. Hence we must use our knowledge of the
intelligence of our own soul as a starting-point for all that we can know of separately
subsistent intelligences. But even granting that by speculative sciences we could arrive
at a knowledge of the essence of our own soul, it does not follow that we could thereby
arrive at a knowledge of all that is knowable about pure spirits; for our intelligence falls