He dis coursing unto them in the ear; but He used a strong figure, thus speaking.
That is, because He was conversing with them alone, and in a small corner of
Palestine, therefore He said, "in darkness," and "in the ear;" contrasting the
boldness of speech, which He was hereafter to confer on them, with the tone of
the conversation which was then going on. "For not to one, or two, or three
cities, but to the whole world you shall preach," says He, "traversing land and
sea, the inhabited country, and the desert; to princes alike and tribes, to
philosophers and orators, saying all with open face, and with all boldness of
speech." Therefore, He said, "On the house tops," and, "In the light," without
any shrinking, and with all freedom.
And wherefore said He not only, "Preach on the housetops," and "Speak in
the light," but added also, "What I tell you in darkness," and "What ye hear in
the ear"? It was to raise up their spirits. As therefore when He said, "He that
believes in me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater works than these
shall he do;" [John 14:12] even so here too, to signify that He will do it all by
them, and more than by Himself, He inserted this. For "the beginning indeed,"
says He, "I have given, and the prelude; but the greater part it is my will to effect
through you." Now this is the language of one not commanding only, but also
declaring beforehand what was to be, and encouraging them with His sayings,
and implying that they should prevail over all, and quietly also removing again
their distress at the evil report. For as this doctrine, after lying hid for a while,
shall overspread all things, so also the evil suspicion of the Jews shall quickly
perish.
Then, because He had lifted them up on high, He again gives warning of the
perils also, adding wings to their mind, and exalting them high above all. For
what says He? "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul." [Matthew 10:28] Do you see how He set them far above all things,
persuading them to despise not anxiety only and calumny, dangers and plots, but
even that which is esteemed of all things most terrible, death? And not death
alone, but by violence too? And He said not, "you shall be slain," but with the

dignity that became Him, He set this before them, saying, "Fear not them which
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear Him which is able
to destroy both soul and body in hell;" bringing round the argument, as He ever
does, to its opposite. For what? Is your fear, says He, of death? And are you
therefore slow to preach? Nay for this very cause I bid you preach, that you fear
death: for this shall deliver you from that which is really death. What though
they shall slay you? Yet over the better part they shall not prevail, though they
strive ten thousand ways. Therefore He said not, "Who do not kill the soul," but,
who "are not able to kill." For wish it as they may, they shall not prevail.
Wherefore, if you fear punishment, fear that, the more grievous by far.
Do you see how again He does not promise them deliverance from death,
but permits them to die, granting them more than if He had not allowed them to
suffer it? Because deliverance from death is not near so great as persuading men
to despise death. You see now, He does not push them into dangers, but sets
them above dangers, and in a short sentence fixes in their mind the doctrines that
relate to the immortality of the soul, and having in two or three words implanted
a saving doctrine, He comforts them also by other considerations.
Thus, lest they should think, when killed and butchered, that as men
forsaken they suffered this, He introduces again the argument of God's
providence, saying on this wise: "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And
one of them shall not fall into a snare without your Father. But the very hairs of
your head are all numbered." [Matthew 10:29-30] "For what is viler than they?"
says He; "nevertheless, not even these shall be taken without God's knowledge."
For He means not this, "by His operation they fall," for this were unworthy of
God; but, "nothing that is done is hid from Him." If then He is not ignorant of
anything that befalls us, and loves us more truly than a father, and so loves us, as
to have numbered our very hairs; we ought not to be afraid. And this He said, not
that God numbers our hairs, but that He might indicate His perfect knowledge,
and His great providence over them. If therefore He both knows all the things
that are done, and is able to save you, and willing; whatever ye may have to