FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

Objection 1:: Further, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 11), "Tully
writes that the laws recognize eight forms of punishment, indemnity,
prison, stripes, retaliation, public disgrace, exile, death, slavery."
Now some of these were prescribed by the Law. "Indemnity," as
when a thief was condemned to make restitution fivefold or fourfold.
"Prison," as when (Num. 15:34) a certain man is ordered to be
imprisoned. "Stripes"; thus (Dt. 25:2), "if they see that the offender
be worthy of stripes; they shall lay him down, and shall cause him to
be beaten before them." "Public disgrace" was brought on to him
who refused to take to himself the wife of his deceased brother, for
she took "off his shoe from his foot, and" did "spit in his face" (Dt.
25:9). It prescribed the "death" penalty, as is clear from (Lev. 20:9):
"He that curseth his father, or mother, dying let him die." The Law
also recognized the "lex talionis," by prescribing (Ex. 21:24): "Eye for
eye, tooth for tooth." Therefore it seems unreasonable that the Law
should not have inflicted the two other punishments, viz. "exile" and
"slavery."
Objection 1:: Further, no punishment is due except for a fault. But
dumb animals cannot commit a fault. Therefore the Law is
unreasonable in punishing them (Ex. 21:29): "If the ox . . . shall kill a
man or a woman," it "shall be stoned": and (Lev. 20:16): "The woman
that shall lie under any beast, shall be killed together with the same."
Therefore it seems that matters pertaining to the relations of one
man with another were unsuitably regulated by the Law.
Objection 1:: Further, the Lord commanded (Ex. 21:12) a murderer to
be punished with death. But the death of a dumb animal is reckoned
of much less account than the slaying of a man. Hence murder
cannot be sufficiently punished by the slaying of a dumb animal.
Therefore it is unfittingly prescribed (Dt. 21:1,4) that "when there
shall be found . . . the corpse of a man slain, and it is not known who
is guilty of the murder . . . the ancients" of the nearest city "shall take
a heifer of the herd, that hath not drawn in the yoke, nor ploughed
the ground, and they shall bring her into a rough and stony valley,
that never was ploughed, nor sown; and there they shall strike off
the head of the heifer."
On the contrary, It is recalled as a special blessing (Ps. 147:20) that
"He hath not done in like manner to every nation; and His judgments
He hath not made manifest to them."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

I answer that, As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ii, 21), quoting Tully, "a
nation is a body of men united together by consent to the law and by
community of welfare." Consequently it is of the essence of a nation
that the mutual relations of the citizens be ordered by just laws. Now
the relations of one man with another are twofold: some are effected
under the guidance of those in authority: others are effected by the
will of private individuals. And since whatever is subject to the
power of an individual can be disposed of according to his will,
hence it is that the decision of matters between one man and
another, and the punishment of evildoers, depend on the direction of
those in authority, to whom men are subject. On the other hand, the
power of private persons is exercised over the things they possess:
and consequently their dealings with one another, as regards such
things, depend on their own will, for instance in buying, selling,
giving, and so forth. Now the Law provided sufficiently in respect of
each of these relations between one man and another. For it
established judges, as is clearly indicated in Dt. 16:18: "Thou shalt
appoint judges and magistrates in all its gates . . . that they may
judge the people with just judgment." It is also directed the manner
of pronouncing just judgments, according to Dt. 1:16,17: "Judge that
which is just, whether he be one of your own country or a stranger:
there shall be no difference of persons." It also removed an occasion
of pronouncing unjust judgment, by forbidding judges to accept
bribes (Ex. 23:8; Dt. 16:19). It prescribed the number of witnesses,
viz. two or three: and it appointed certain punishments to certain
crimes, as we shall state farther on (ad 10).
But with regard to possessions, it is a very good thing, says the
Philosopher (Polit. ii, 2) that the things possessed should be distinct,
and the use thereof should be partly common, and partly granted to
others by the will of the possessors. These three points were
provided for by the Law. Because, in the first place, the possessions
themselves were divided among individuals: for it is written (Num.
33:53,54): "I have given you" the land "for a possession: and you
shall divide it among you by lot." And since many states have been
ruined through want of regulations in the matter of possessions, as
the Philosopher observes (Polit. ii, 6); therefore the Law provided a
threefold remedy against the regularity of possessions. The first was
that they should be divided equally, wherefore it is written (Num.
33:54): "To the more you shall give a larger part, and to the fewer, a
lesser." A second remedy was that possessions could not be
alienated for ever, but after a certain lapse of time should return to
their former owner, so as to avoid confusion of possessions (cf. ad