up: even should you run (he would say), even should you be very earnest, do not
consider that the well doing is your own. For if you obtain not the impulse that is
from above, all is to no purpose. Nevertheless that you will attain that which
thou earnestly strivest after is very evident; so long as you run, so long as you
will.
He did not then assert this, that we run in vain, but that, if we think the
whole to be our own, if we do not assign the greater part to God, we run in vain.
For neither has God willed that the whole should be His, lest He should appear
to be crowning us without cause: nor again our's, lest we should fall away to
pride. For if when we have the smaller [share], we think much of ourselves, what
should we do if the whole depended on us?
6. Indeed God has done away many things for the purpose of cutting away
our boastfulness, and still there is the high hand. With how many afflictions has
He encompassed us, so as to cut away our proud spirit! With how many wild
beasts has He encircled us! For indeed when some say, 'why is this?' 'Of what
use is this?' They utter these things against the will of God. He has placed you in
the midst of so great fear, and yet not even so are you lowly-minded; but if you
ever attain a little success, you reach to Heaven itself in pride.
For this cause [come] rapid changes and reverses; and yet not even so are
we instructed. For this cause are there continual and untimely deaths, but are
minded as if we were immortal, as if we should never die. We plunder, we overreach, as though we were never to give account. We build as if we were to abide
here always. And not even the word of God daily sounded into our ears, nor the
events themselves instruct us. Not a day, not an hour can be mentioned, in which
we may not see continual funerals. But all in vain: and nothing reaches our
hardness [of heart]: nor are we even able to become better by the calamities of
others; or rather, we are not willing. When we ourselves only are afflicted, then
we are subdued, and yet if God take off His hand, we again lift up our hand: no
one considers what is proper for man, no one despises the things on earth; no one
looks to Heaven. But as swine turn their heads downwards, stooping towards

their belly, wallowing in the mire; so too the great body of mankind defile
themselves with the most intolerable filth, without being conscious of it.
7. For better were it to be defiled with unclean mud than with sins; for he
who is defiled with the one, washes it off in a little time, and becomes like one
who had never from the first fallen into that slough; but he who has fallen into
the deep pit of sin has contracted a defilement that is not cleansed by water, but
needs long time, and strict repentance, and tears and lamentations, and more
wailing, and that more fervent, than we show over the dearest friends. For this
defilement attaches to us from without, wherefore we also speedily put it away;
but the other is generated from within, wherefore also we wash it off with
difficulty, and cleanse ourselves from it. "For from the heart" (it is said)
"proceed evil thoughts, fornications, adulteries, thefts, false witnesses."
[Matthew 15:19] Wherefore also the Prophet said, "Create in me a clean heart,
O God." [Psalm 51:10] And another, "Wash your heart from wickedness, O
Jerusalem." [Jeremiah 4:14] (You see that it is both our [work] and God's.) And
again, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." [Matthew 5:8]
Let us become clean to the utmost of our power. Let us wipe away our sins.
And how to wipe them away, the prophet teaches, saying, "Wash you, make you
clean, put away your wickedness from your souls, before My eyes." [Isaiah 1:16]
What is "before My eyes"? Because some seem to be free from wickedness, but
only to men, while to God they are manifest as being "whited sepulchers."
Therefore He says, so put them away as I see. "Learn to do well, seek judgment,
do justice for the poor and lowly." "Come now, and let us reason together, says
the Lord: and though your sins be as scarlet, I will make you white as snow, and
if they be as crimson, I will make you white as wool." [Isaiah 1:17-18] You see
that we must first cleanse ourselves, and then God cleanses us. For having said
first, "Wash you, make you clean," He then added "I will make you white."
Let no one then, [even] of those who have come to the extremest
wickedness, despair of himself. For (He says) even if you have passed into the
habit, yea and almost into the nature of wickedness itself, be not afraid.