those from good actions. Since if we do the one only, and while we listen to the
charm, war with the charmer by our actions, as he did of old [1 Samuel 19:10];
the remedy will even turn to judgment to us, and the madness become the more
furious. For before we heard, the wicked demon was afraid lest we should hear it
and recover. But when after hearing it even, we continue the same as we were,
this is the very thing to rid him of his fear. Let us sing then the Psalm of good
deeds, that we may cast out the sin that is worse than the demon. For a demon
certainly will not deprive us of heaven, but does in some cases even work with
the sober-minded. But sin will assuredly cast us out. For this is a demon we
willingly receive, a self-chosen madness. Wherefore also it has none to pity it or
to pardon it. Let us then sing charms over a soul in this plight, as well from the
other Scriptures, as also from the blessed David. And let the mouth sing, and the
mind be instructed. Even this is no small thing. For if we once teach the tongue
to sing, the soul will be ashamed to be devising the opposite of what this sings.
Nor is this the only good thing that we shall gain, for we shall also come to know
many things which are our interest. For he discourses to you both of things
present, and things to come, and of things seen, and of the invisible Creation.
And if you would learn about the Heaven, whether it abides as it is or shall be
changed, he gives you a clear answer, and will say, "The heavens shall wax old
as does a garment, and as a vesture shall you fold them up, O God, and they
shall be changed." [Psalm 102:26] And if you wish to hear of the form of them
again, you shall hear, "That spreads forth the Heaven like a curtain" ([δέρριν]).
And if you be minded to know further about the back of them, he will tell you
again, "that covers His upper chambers with waters." [Psalm 104:2-3] And even
here he does not pause, but will likewise discourse with you on the breadth and
height, and show you that these are of equal measure. For, "As far as the east,"
he says, "is from the west, so far has He set our iniquities from us. Like as the
heaven's height above the earth, so is the Lord's mercy upon them that fear
Him." (ib. 103:12, 11.) But if you would busy yourself with the foundation of the
earth, even this he will not hide from you, but you shall hear him singing and

saying, "He has founded it upon the seas." [Psalm 24:2] And if of earthquakes
you are desirous to know, whence they come, he will free you from this
difficulty also, by saying, "That looks upon the earth, and makes it tremble."
[Psalm 103:32] And if you enquire the use of the night, this too may thou learn,
and know from him. For "therein all the beasts of the forest do move." [Psalm
103:20] And in what way the mountains are for use, he will tell you, "The high
mountains are for the stags." And why there are rocks, "The rocks are a refuge
for the porcupines." [Psalm 103:18] Why are there trees yielding no fruit? Learn
from him, for "there the sparrows build their nests." [Psalm 103:17] Why are
there fountains in the wildernesses? Hear, "that by them the fowls of the heaven
dwell, and the wild beasts." [Psalm 103:12] Why is there wine? Not that you
may drink only (for water is of a nature to suffice for this), but that you may be
gladdened also, "For wine makes glad the heart of man." [Psalm 103:15] And by
knowing this you will know how far the use of wine is allowable. Whence are
the fowls and the wild beasts nourished? You will hear from his words, "All
these wait upon You, to give them their meat in due season." [Psalm 103:27] If
you say, For what purpose are the cattle? He will answer you, that these also are
for you, "That causes the grass," he says, "to grow for the cattle, and the green
herb for the service (or retinue)of men." [Psalm 103:14] What is the use of the
moon? Hear him saying, "He made the moon for seasons." [Psalm 104:19] And
that all things seen and those not seen are made, is a thing that he has also clearly
taught us by saying, "Himself spoke, and they were made, He commanded, and
they were created." [Psalm 32:9] And that there is an end of death, this he also
teaches when he says, "God shall deliver my soul from the hand of hell when He
shall receive me." [Psalm 43:15] Whence was our body made? He also tells us;
"He remembers that we are dust" [Psalm 103:14]; and again, whither goes it
away? "It shall return to its dust." [Psalm 104:29] Why was this universe made?
For you: "For you crown him with glory and honor, and settest him over the
works of Your hands." (ib. 8:5, 6.) Have we men any community with the
Angels? This he also tells us, saying as follows, "You have made him a little