would be a strange piece of stupidity on my part if, thinking only of praise from
the outside public, and doing my best to silence their accusations, I were unable
to convince my dearest of all friends that I am not wronging him, and were to
treat him with indifference greater than the zeal which he has displayed on my
behalf, treating me with such forbearance as even to refrain from accusing me of
the wrongs which he says he has suffered from me, and putting his own interests
out of the question in consideration for mine.
What is the wrong that I have done you, since I have determined to embark
from this point upon the sea of apology? Is it that I misled you and concealed my
purpose? Yet I did it for the benefit of yourself who wast deceived, and of those
to whom I surrendered you by means of this deceit. For if the evil of deception is
absolute, and it is never right to make use of it, I am prepared to pay any penalty
you please: or rather, as you will never endure to inflict punishment upon me, I
shall subject myself to the same condemnation which is pronounced by judges
on evil-doers when their accusers have convicted them. But if the thing is not
always harmful, but becomes good or bad according to the intention of those
who practise it, you must desist from complaining of deceit, and prove that it has
been devised against you for a bad purpose; and as long as this proof is wanting
it would only be fair for those who wish to conduct themselves prudently, not
only to abstain from reproaches and accusation, but even to give a friendly
reception to the deceiver. For a well-timed deception, undertaken with an upright
intention, has such advantages, that many persons have often had to undergo
punishment for abstaining from fraud. And if you investigate the history of
generals who have enjoyed the highest reputation from the earliest ages, you will
find that most of their triumphs were achieved by stratagem, and that such are
more highly commended than those who conquer in open fight. For the latter
conduct their campaigns with greater expenditure of money and men, so that
they gain nothing by the victory, but suffer just as much distress as those who
have been defeated, both in the sacrifice of troops and the exhaustion of funds.
But, besides this, they are not even permitted to enjoy all the glory which

pertains to the victory; for no small part of it is reaped by those who have fallen,
because in spirit they were victorious, their defeat was only a bodily one: so that
had it been possible for them not to fall when they were wounded, and death had
not come and put the finishing stroke to their labors, there would have been no
end of their prowess. But one who has been able to gain the victory by stratagem
involves the enemy in ridicule as well as disaster. Again, in the other case both
sides equally carry off the honors bestowed upon valor, whereas in this case they
do not equally obtain those which are bestowed on wisdom, but the prize falls
entirely to the victors, and, another point no less important is that they preserve
the joy of the victory for the state unalloyed; for abundance of resources and
multitudes of men are not like mental powers: the former indeed if continually
used in war necessarily become exhausted, and fail those who possess them,
whereas it is the nature of wisdom to increase the more it is exercised. And not
in war only, but also in peace the need of deceit may be found, not merely in
reference to the affairs of the state, but also in private life, in the dealings of
husband with wife and wife with husband, son with father, friend with friend,
and also children with a parent. For the daughter of Saul would not have been
able to rescue her husband out of Saul's hands except by deceiving her father.
And her brother, wishing to save him whom she had rescued when he was again
in danger, made use of the same weapon as the wife. [1 Samuel 20:11]
Basil: But none of these cases apply to me: for I am not an enemy, nor one
of those who are striving to injure you, but quite the contrary. For I entrusted all
my interests to your judgment, and always followed it whenever you bid me.
Chrysostom: But, my admirable and excellent Sir, this is the very reason
why I took the precaution of saying that it was a good thing to employ this kind
of deceit, not only in war, and in dealing with enemies, but also in peace, and in
dealing with our dearest friends. For as a proof that it is beneficial not only to the
deceivers, but also to those who are deceived; if you go to any of the physicians
and ask them how they relieve their patients from disease, they will tell you that
they do not depend upon their professional skill alone, but sometimes conduct