Unction causes a bodily healing, not by a natural property of the
matter, but by the Divine power which works reasonably. And since
reasonable working never produces a secondary effect, except in so
far as it is required for the principal effect, it follows that a bodily
healing does not always ensue from this sacrament, but only when it
is requisite for the spiritual healing: and then it produces it always,
provided there be no obstacle on the part of the recipient.
Reply to Objection 1: This objection proves that bodily health is not
the principal effect of this sacrament: and this is true.
The Reply to the Second Objection is clear from what has been said
above (cf. Question 29, Article 8).
Reply to Objection 3: This prayer is the form of this sacrament as
stated above (Question 29, Articles 8,9). Hence, so far as its form is
concerned, this sacrament derives from it its efficacy in healing the
body.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether this sacrament imprints a character?

Objection 1: It would seem that this sacrament imprints a character.
For a character is a distinctive sign. Now just as one who is baptized
is distinguished from one who is not so is one who is anointed, from
one who is not. Therefore, just as Baptism imprints a character so
does Extreme Unction.
Objection 2: Further, there is an anointing in the sacraments or order
and Confirmation, as there is in this sacrament. But a character is
imprinted in those sacraments. Therefore a character is imprinted in
this one also.
Objection 3: Further, every sacrament contains something that is a
reality only, something that is a sacrament only, and something that
is both reality and sacrament. Now nothing in this sacrament can be
assigned as both reality and sacrament except a character.
Therefore in this sacrament also, a character is imprinted.
On the contrary, No sacrament that imprints a character is repeated.
But this sacrament is repeated as we shall state further on (Question
33). Therefore it does not imprint a character.
Further, a sacramental character causes a distinction among those
who are in the present Church. But Extreme Unction is given to one
who is departing from the present Church. Therefore it does not
imprint a character.
I answer that, A character is not imprinted except in those
sacraments whereby man is deputed to some sacred duty. Now this
sacrament is for no other purpose than a remedy, and man is not
deputed thereby to do or receive anything holy. Therefore it does not
imprint a character.
Reply to Objection 1: A character marks a distinction of . states with
regard to duties which have to be performed in the Church, a
distinction which a man does not receive by being anointed.
Reply to Objection 2: The unction of orders and Confirmation, is the
unction of consecration whereby a man is deputed to some sacred
duty, whereas this unction is remedial. Hence the comparison fails.