John 15:4
"As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself except it abide in the vine, so neither
can he who abides not in Me."
For that they might not be separated from Him by timidity, He fastens and
glues to Himself their souls slackened through fear, and holds out to them good
hopes for the future. For the root remains, but to be taken away, or to be left,
belongs to the branches. Then having urged them on in both ways, by things
pleasant and things painful, He requires first what is to be done on our side.

John 15:5
"He that abides in Me, and I in him."
Do you see that the Son contributes not less than the Father towards the
care of the disciples? The Father purges, but He keeps them in Himself. The
abiding in the root is that which makes the branches to be fruit-bearing. For that
which is not purged, if it remain on the root, bears fruit, though perhaps not so
much as it ought; but that which remains not, bears none at all. But still the
"purging" also has been shown to belong to the Son, and the "abiding in the
root," to the Father, who also begot the Root. Do you see how all is common,
both the "purging," and the enjoying the virtue which is from the root?
2. Now it were a great penalty, the being able to do nothing, but He stays
not the punishment at this point, but carries on His discourse farther.

John 15:6
"He is cast forth . . ."
No longer enjoying the benefit of the husbandman's hand. "And is
withered." That is, if he had anything of the root, he loses it; if any grace, he is
stripped of this, and is bereft of the help and life which proceed from it. And
what the end? "He is cast into the fire." Not such he who abides with Him. Then
He shows what it is to "abide," and says,

John 15:7
"If My words abide in you."
Do you see that with reason I said above, that He seeks the proof by works?
For when He had said, "Whatsoever you shall ask I will do it" [c. xiv. 14, 15], He
added, "If you love Me, you will keep My commandments." And here, "If you
abide in Me, and My words abide in you."
"You shall ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you."
This He said to show that they who plotted against Him should be burnt up,
but that "they" should bear fruit. Then transferring the fear from them to the
others, and showing that they should be invincible, He says,

John 15:8
"Herein is My Father glorified, that you be My disciples, and bear much fruit."
Hence He makes His discourse credible, for if the bearing fruit pertains to
the glory of the Father, He will not neglect His own glory. "And you shall be My
disciples." Do you see how he that bears fruit, he is the disciple? But what is, "In
this is the Father glorified"? "He rejoices when you abide in Me, when you bear
fruit."

John 15:9
"As the Father has loved Me, so have I loved you."
Here at length He speaks in a more human manner, for this, as spoken to
men, has its peculiar force. Since what a measure of love did He manifest, who
chose to die, who counted worthy of such honor those who were His slaves, His
haters, His open enemies, and led them up to the heavens! "If then I love you, be
bold; if it be the glory of My Father that you bear fruit, imagine nothing ill."
Then that He may not make them supine, observe how He braces them again,
"Continue ye in My love."
"For this you have the power to do." And how shall this be?