His knowledge in every place."
He said above, "Which always causes us to triumph." Here he says "in
every place," showing that every place and every time is full of the Apostles'
labors. And he uses yet another metaphor, that of the sweet savor. For 'like as
those who bear ointment, so are we,' says he, 'manifest to all'; calling the
knowledge a very precious ointment. Moreover, he said not, 'the knowledge;' but
"the savor of the knowledge;" for such is the nature of the present knowledge,
not very clear nor uncovered. Whence also he said in the former Epistle, "For
now we see in a mirror darkly." [1 Corinthians 13:12] And here he calls that
which is such a "savor." Now he that perceives the savor knows that there is
ointment lying somewhere; but of what nature it is he knows not yet, unless he
happens before to have seen it. 'So also we. That God is, we know, but what in
substance we know not yet. We are then, as it were, a Royal censer, breathing
wherever we go of the heavenly ointment and the spiritual sweet savor.' Now he
said this, at once both to set forth the power of the Preaching, in that by the very
designs formed against them, they shine more than those who prosecute them
and who cause the whole world to know both their trophies and their sweet
savor: and to exhort them in regard to their afflictions and trials to bear all nobly,
seeing that even before the Recompense they reap this glory inexpressible.

2 Corinthians 2:15
"For we are a sweet savor of Christ unto God, in them that are saved and in
them that perish."
Whether, says he, one be saved or be lost, the Gospel continues to have its
proper virtue: and as the light, although it blinds the weakly, is still light, though
causing blindness; and as honey, though it be bitter to those who are diseased, is
in its nature sweet; so also is the Gospel of sweet savor, even though some
should be lost who believe it not. For not It, but their own perverseness, works
the perdition. And by this most of all is its sweet savor manifested, by which the
corrupt and vicious perish; so that not only by the salvation of the good, but also
by the perdition of the wicked is its excellence declared. Since both the sun, for
this reason most especially that he is exceeding bright, does wound the eyes of
the weak: and the Saviour is "for the fall and rising again of many," [Luke 2:34]
but still He continues to be a Saviour, though ten thousand fall; and His coming
brought a sorer punishment upon them that believe not, but still it continues to
be full of healing. Whence also he says, "We are unto God a sweet savor;" that
is, 'even though some be lost we continue to be that which we are.' Moreover he
said not simply "a sweet savor," but "unto God." And when we are a sweet savor
unto God, and He decrees these things, who shall henceforth gainsay?
The expression also, "sweet savor of Christ," appears to me to admit of a
double interpretation: for he means either that in dying they offered themselves a
sacrifice: or that they were a sweet savor of the death of Christ, as if one should
say, this incense is a sweet savor of this victim. The expression then, sweet
savor, either signifies this, or, as I first said, that they are daily sacrificed for
Christ's sake.
3. Do you see to what a height he has advanced the trials, terming them a
triumph and a sweet savor and a sacrifice offered unto God. Then, whereas he