towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might, world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 80 on Matthew

Matthew 26:6-7.
"Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, there
came unto Him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and
poured it on His head, as He sat at meat."
This woman seems indeed to be one and the same with all the evangelists,
yet she is not so; but though with the three she does seem to me to be one and
the same, yet not so with John, but another person, one much to be admired, the
sister of Lazarus.
But not without purpose did the evangelist mention the leprosy of Simon,
but in order that He might show whence the woman took confidence, and came
unto Him. For inasmuch as the leprosy seemed a most unclean disease, and to be
abhorred, and yet she saw Jesus had both healed the man (for else He would not
have chosen to have tarried with a leper), and had gone into his house; she grew
confident, that He would also easily wipe off the uncleanness of her soul. And
not for nought does He name the city also, Bethany, but that you might learn,
that of His own will He comes to His passion. For He who before this was
fleeing through the midst of them; then, at the time when their envy was most
kindled, comes near within about fifteen furlongs; so completely was His former
withdrawing Himself a part of a dispensation.
The woman therefore having seen Him, and having taken confidence from
thence came unto Him. For if she that had the issue of blood, although conscious
to herself of nothing like this, yet because of that natural seeming uncleanness,
approached Him trembling and in fear; much more was it likely this woman
should be slow, and shrink back because of her evil conscience. Wherefore also
it is after many women, the Samaritan, the Canaanite, her that had the issue of
blood, and other besides, that she comes unto Him, being conscious to herself of

much impurity; and then not publicly but in a house. And whereas all the others
were coming unto Him for the healing of the body alone, she came unto Him by
way of honor only, and for the amendment of the soul. For neither was she at all
afflicted in body, so that for this most especially one might marvel at her.
And not as to a mere man did she come unto Him; for then she would not
have wiped His feet with her hair, but as to one greater than man can be.
Therefore that which is the most honorable member of the whole body, this she
laid at Christ's feet, even her own head.
"But when His disciples saw it, they had indignation," such are the words,
"saying, To what purpose is this waste? For this ointment might have been sold
for much, and given to the poor. But when Jesus understood it, He said, Why
trouble ye the woman? For she has wrought a good work upon me? For you
have the poor always with you, but me you have not always. For in that she has
poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial. Verily I say unto you,
Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also
this, that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of her."
And whence had they this thought? They used to hear their Master saying,
"I will have mercy, and not sacrifice," and blaming the Jews, because they
omitted the weightier matters, judgment, and mercy, and faith, and discoursing
much on the mount concerning almsgiving, and from these things they inferred
with themselves, and reasoned, that if He accepts not whole burnt offerings,
neither the ancient worship, much more will He not accept the anointing of oil.
But though they thus thought, He knowing her intention suffers her. For
indeed great was her reverence, and unspeakable her zeal; wherefore of this
exceeding condescension, He permitted the oil to be poured even on His head.
For if He refused not to become man, and to be borne in the womb, and to
be fed at the breast, why do you marvel, if He does not utterly reject this? For
like as the Father suffered a savor of meat, and smoke, even so did He the harlot,
accepting, as I have already said, her intention. For Jacob too anointed a pillar to
God, and oil was offered in the sacrifices, and the priests were anointed with