behold there was a great earthquake. For an angel of the Lord descended from
Heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door of the tomb, and sat
upon it. His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow."
After the resurrection came the angel. Wherefore then came he, and took
away the stone? Because of the women, for they themselves had seen Him then
in the sepulchre. Therefore that they might believe that He was risen again, they
see the sepulchre void of the body. For this cause he removed the stone, for this
cause also an earthquake took place, that they might be thoroughly aroused and
awakened. For they had come to pour oil on Him, and these things were done at
night, and it is likely that some also had become drowsy. And for what intent and
cause does he say, "Fear not ye?" First he delivers them from the dread, and then
tells them of the resurrection. And the ye is of one showing them great honor,
and indicating, that extreme punishment awaits them that had dared to do, what
the others had dared, except they repented. For to be afraid is not for you, he
means, but for them that crucified Him.
Having delivered them then from the fear both by his words, and by his
appearance (for his form he showed bright, as bearing such good tidings), he
went on to say, "I know that you seek Jesus the Crucified." And he is not
ashamed to call Him "crucified;" for this is the chief of the blessings.
"He is risen." [Matthew 28:6] Whence is it evident? "As He said." So that if
you refuse to believe me, he would say, remember His words, and neither will
you disbelieve me. Then also another proof, "Come and see the place where He
lay." For this he had lifted up the stone, in order that from this too they might
receive the proof. "And tell His disciples, that you shall see Him in Galilee."
And he prepares them to bear good tidings to others, which thing most of all
made them believe. And He said well "in Galilee," freeing them from troubles
and dangers, so that fear should not hinder their faith.
"And they departed from the sepulchre with fear and joy." Why could this
be? They had seen a thing amazing, and beyond expectation, a tomb empty,
where they had before seen Him laid. Wherefore also He had led them to the

sight, that they might become witnesses of both things, both of His tomb, and of
His resurrection. For they considered that no man could have taken Him, when
so many soldiers were sitting by Him, unless He raised up Himself. For this
cause also they rejoice and wonder, and receive the reward of so much
continuance with Him, that they should first see and gladly declare, not what had
been said only, but also what they beheld.
3. Therefore after then they had departed with fear and joy, "Behold, Jesus
met them, saying, All hail." But "they held Him by the feet," and with exceeding
joy and gladness ran unto Him, and received by the touch also, an infallible
proof, and full assurance of the resurrection. "And they worshipped Him." What
then says He? "Be not afraid." Again, He Himself casts out their fear, making
way for faith, "But go, tell my brethren, that they go into Galilee, and there shall
they see me." Mark how He Himself sends good tidings to His disciples by these
women, bringing to honor, as I have often said, that sex, which was most
dishonored, and to good hopes; and healing that which was diseased.
Perchance some one of you would wish to be like them, to hold the feet of
Jesus; ye can even now, and not His feet and His hands only, but even lay hold
on that sacred head, receiving the awful mysteries with a pure conscience. But
not here only, but also in that day you shall see Him, coming with that
unspeakable glory, and the multitude of the angels, if you are disposed to be
humane; and you shall hear not these words only, "All hail!" but also those
others, "Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
before the foundation of the world." [Matthew 25:34]
Be therefore humane, that you may hear these things; and you women, that
wear gold, who have looked on the running of these women, at last, though late,
lay aside the disease of the desire for golden ornaments. So that if you are
emulous of these women, change the ornaments which you wear, and clothe
yourselves instead with almsgiving. What is the use, I pray you, of these
precious stones, and of the garments spangled with gold? "My soul," you say, "is
glad, and is pleased with these things." I asked you the profit, but you tell me the