Christ." He shows that nothing was more dearly desired by him than this, to
speak. "For which I am also in bonds; that I may make it manifest, as I ought to
speak." [Colossians 4:4] He means with much boldness of speech, and
withholding nothing. His bonds display, not obscure him. With much boldness
he means. Tell me, are you in bonds, and do you exhort others? Yea, my bonds
give me the greater boldness; but I pray for God's furtherance, for I have heard
the voice of Christ saying, "When they deliver you up, be not anxious how or
what you shall speak." [Matthew 10:19] And see, how he has expressed himself
in metaphor, "that God may open to us a door for the word"; (see, how
unassuming he is; even in his bonds, how he expresses himself;) that is, that He
would soften their hearts. Still he said not so; but, "that He would give us
boldness"; out of lowlymindedness he thus spoke, and that which he had, he asks
to receive.
He shows in this Epistle, why Christ came not in those times, in that he
calls the former things "shadow, but the body," says he, "is of Christ." So that it
was necessary they should be formed to habits under the shadow. At the same
time also he exhibits the greatest proof of the love he bears to them; "in order
that you," he says, "may hear, for that reason, 'I am in bonds.'" Again he sets
before us those bonds of his; which I so greatly love, which rouse up my heart,
and always draw me into longing to see Paul bound, and in his bonds writing,
and preaching, and baptizing, and catechizing. In his bonds he was referred to on
behalf of the Churches everywhere; in his bonds he built up incalculably. Then
was he rather at large. For hear him saying, "So that most of the brethren being
confident through my bonds are more abundantly bold to speak the word without
fear." [Philippians 1:14] And again he makes the same avowal of himself,
saying, "For when I am weak, then am I strong." [2 Corinthians 12:10]
Wherefore he said also, "But the word of God is not bound." [2 Timothy 2:9] He
was bound with malefactors, with prisoners, with murderers; he, the teacher of
the world, he that had ascended into the third heaven, that had heard the
unspeakable words, was bound. [2 Corinthians 12:4] But then was his course the

swifter. He that was bound, was now loosed; he that was unbound, was bound.
For he indeed was doing what he would; while the other prevented him not, nor
accomplished his own purpose.
What are you about, O senseless one? Do you think he is a fleshly runner?
Does he strive in our race-course? His course of life is in heaven; him that runs
in heaven, things on earth cannot bind nor hold. Do you see not this sun?
Enclose his beams with fetters! stay him from his course! You can not. Then
neither can you Paul! Yea, much less this one than that, for this enjoys more of
Providence than that, seeing he bears to us light, not such as that is, but the true.
Where now are they who are unwilling to suffer anything for Christ? But
why do I say "suffer," seeing that they are unwilling even to give up their
wealth? In time past Paul also used to bind, and cast into prison; but since he has
become Christ's servant, he glories no more of doing, but of suffering. And this,
moreover, is marvelous in the Preaching, when it is thus raised up and increased
by the sufferers themselves, and not by the persecutors. Where has any seen such
contests as this? He that suffers ill, conquers; he that does ill, is worsted.
Brighter is this man than the other. Through bonds the Preaching entered. "I am
not ashamed" [Romans 1:16], yea, I glory even, he says, in preaching The
Crucified. For consider, I pray: the whole world left those who were at large, and
went over to those that are bound; turning away from the imprisoners, it honors
those laden with chains; hating the crucifiers, it worships the Crucified.
Not the only marvel is it that the preachers were fishermen, that they were
ignorant; but that there were also other hindrances, hindrances too by nature; still
the increase was all the more abundant. Not only was their ignorance no
hindrance; but even it itself caused the Preaching to be manifested. For hear
Luke saying, "And perceiving that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they
marveled." [Acts 4:13] Not only were bonds no hindrance, but even of itself this
made them more confident. Not so bold were the disciples when Paul was at
large, as when he was bound. For he says, they "are more abundantly bold to
speak the word" of God "without fear." [Philippians 1:14] Where are they that