contained in this sacrament: and there is no need for the matter to
signify such a thing. Hence it is not necessary for balsam to be
included in the matter of this sacrament, because on account of its
fragrance it is indicative of a good name, which is no longer
necessary, for its own sake, to those who are dying; they need only a
clear conscience which is signified by oil.
Reply to Objection 2: Wine heals by its roughness, oil by its
softness, wherefore healing with wine pertains to Penance rather
than to this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: Though olive oil is not produced everywhere,
yet it can easily be transported from one place to another. Moreover
this sacrament is not so necessary that the dying cannot obtain
salvation without it.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the oil ought to be consecrated?

Objection 1: It would seem that the oil need not be consecrated.
Because there is a sanctification in the use of this sacrament,
through the form of words. Therefore another sanctification is
superfluous if it be applied to the matter.
Objection 2: Further, the efficacy and signification of the sacraments
are in their very matter. But the signification of the effect of this
sacrament, is suitable to oil on account of its natural properties, and
the efficacy thereof is due to the Divine institution. Therefore its
matter does not need to be sanctified.
Objection 3: Further, Baptism is a more perfect sacrament than
Extreme Unction. But, so far as the essentials of the sacrament are
concerned, the baptismal matter needs no sanctification. Neither
therefore does the matter of Extreme Unction need to be sanctified.
On the contrary, In all other anointings the matter is previously
consecrated. Therefore since this sacrament is an anointing, it
requires consecrated matter.
I answer that, Some hold that mere oil is the matter of this
sacrament, and that the sacrament itself is perfected in the
consecration of the oil by the bishop. But this is clearly false since
we proved when treating of the Eucharist that that sacrament alone
consists in the consecration of the matter (Question 2, Article 1, ad
2).
We must therefore say that this sacrament consists in the anointing
itself, just as Baptism consists in the washing, and that the matter of
this sacrament is consecrated oil. Three reasons may be assigned
why consecrated matter is needed in this sacrament and in certain
others. The first is that all sacramental efficacy is derived from
Christ: wherefore those sacraments which He Himself used, derived
their efficacy from His use of them, even as, by the contact of His
flesh, He bestowed the force of regeneration on the waters. But He
did not use this sacrament, nor any bodily anointing, wherefore in all
anointings a consecrated matter is required. The second reason is
that this sacrament confers a plenitude of grace, so as to take away
not only sin but also the remnants of sin, and bodily sickness. The