salvation in particular, that hereby they might be the rather won over. At any
rate, all the testimonies that are first cited, and for which it was the season
immediately at the time of the birth, say nothing great, nor lofty concerning Him,
nor such as those subsequent to the manifestation of the miracles; for these
discourse more distinctly concerning His dignity. For instance, when after many
miracles children were singing hymns unto Him, hear what says the prophet,
"Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings You have perfected praise." And again,
"I will consider the Heavens, the works of Your fingers;" which signifies Him to
be Maker of the universe. And the testimony too, which was produced after the
ascension, manifests His equality with the Father; thus saying, "The Lord said
unto my Lord, Sit on my right hand." And Isaiah too says, "He that rises up to
rule over the Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles trust."
But how says he that Bethlehem is "not the least among the princes of
Judah?" for not in Palestine alone, but in the whole world, the village has
become conspicuous. Why, so far he was speaking to Jews; wherefore also he
added, "He shall feed my people Israel." And yet He fed the whole world; but as
I have said, He is fain not to offend as yet, by revealing what He has to say
touching the Gentiles.
But how was it, one may say, that He did not feed the Jewish people? I
answer, first, this too is accomplished: for by the term Israel in this place, he
figuratively meant such as believed on Him from among the Jews. And Paul
interpreting this, says, "For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel,"
[Romans 9:6] but as many as have been born by faith and promise. And if He
did not feed them all, this is their own fault and blame. For when they ought to
have worshipped with the wise men, and have glorified God that such a time had
come, doing away all their sins (for not a word was spoken to them of judgments
set, or of accounts to be given, but of a mild and meek Shepherd); they for their
part do just the contrary, and are troubled, and make disturbance, and go on
continually framing plots without end.
3. "Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, inquired of them

diligently what time the star appeared:" [Matthew 2:7]
Attempting to slay that which was born—an act of extreme idiotcy not of
madness only; since what had been said and done was enough to have
withholden him from any such attempt. For those occurrences were not after the
manner of man. A star, I mean, calling the wise men from on high; and
barbarians making so long a pilgrimage, to worship Him that lay in swaddling
clothes and a manger; and prophets too from of old, proclaiming beforehand all
this—these and all the rest were more than human events: but nevertheless, none
of these things restrained him. For such a thing is wickedness. It falls foul of
itself, and is ever attempting impossibilities. And mark his utter folly. If on the
one hand he believed the prophecy, and accounted it to be unchangeable, it was
quite clear that he was attempting impossibilities; if again he disbelieved, and
did not expect that those sayings would come to pass, he need not have been in
fear and alarm, nor have formed any plot on that behalf. So that in either way his
craft was superfluous.
And this too came of the utmost folly, to think that the wise men would
make more account of him than of the Child that was born, for the sake of which
they had come so long a journey. For if, before they saw, they were so inflamed
with longing for Him; after they had seen with their eyes, and been confirmed by
the prophecy, how hoped he to persuade them to betray the young Child to him?
Nevertheless, many as were the reasons to withhold him, he made the
attempt; and having "privily called the wise men, he inquired of them." Because
he thought that Jews would be concerned in favor of the Child, and he never
could expect that they would fall away unto such madness as to be willing to
give up to His enemies their Protector and Saviour, and Him who had come for
the deliverance of their nation. On account of this he both calls them privily, and
seeks the time not of the Child, but of the star: thereby marking out the object of
his chase so as to include far more than it. For the star, I think, must have
appeared a long time before. It was a long time which the wise men had to spend
on their journey. In order, therefore, that they might present themselves just after