with you; nothing but a mere wish on your part, sitting or standing, and you have
got a mighty crown: a crown far greater than those (combatants earn): for to
throw an enemy standing to the encounter, is nothing like so great as to
overcome the darts of anger. You have conquered, without having even let him
close with you, you have thrown down the passion that was in you, have slain
the beast that was roused, have quelled the anger that was raging, like some
excellent herdsman. The fight was like to have been an intestine one, the war a
civil war. For, as those who sit down to besiege from without (endeavor to),
embroil (the besieged) in civil discords, and then overcome them; so he that
insults, unless he rouse the passion within us, will not be able to overcome us:
unless we kindle the flame in ourselves, he has no power. Let the spark of anger
be within us, so as to be ready for lighting at the right moment, not against
ourselves, nor so as to involve us in numberless evils. See ye not how the fire in
houses is kept apart, and not thrown about at random everywhere, neither among
straw, nor among the linen, nor just where it may chance, that so there may not
be danger, if a wind blow on it, of its kindling a flame: but whether a maidservant have a lamp, or the cook light a fire, there is many an injunction given,
not to do this in the draught of the wind, nor near a wooden panel, nor in the
night-time: but when the night has come on, we extinguish the fire, fearing lest
perchance while we are asleep and there is none to help, it set fire, and burn us
all. Let this also be done with regard to anger; let it not be scattered everywhere
up and down in our thoughts, but let it be in some deep recess of the mind, that
the wind arising from the words of him who is opposing us may not easily reach
to it, but that it receive the wind (which is to rouse it) from ourselves, who know
how to rouse it in due measure and with safety. If it receive the wind from
without, it knows no moderation; it will set everything on fire: oftentimes when
we are asleep this wind will come upon it, and will burn up all. Let it therefore
be with us (in safe keeping) in such sort as only to kindle a light: for anger does
kindle a light when it is managed as it ought to be: and let us have torches
against those who wrong others, against the devil. Let not the spark lie anywhere

as it may chance, nor be thrown about; let us keep it safe under ashes: in lowly
thoughts let us keep it slumbering. We do not want it at all times, but when there
is need to subdue and to make tender, to mollify obduracy, and convict the soul.
What evils have angry and wrathful passions wrought! And what makes it
grievous indeed is, that when we have parted asunder, we have no longer the
power to come together again, but we wait for others (to do this): each is
ashamed, and blushes to come back himself and reconcile the other. See, he is
not ashamed to part asunder and to be separated; no, he takes the lead as author
of the evil: but to come forward and patch that which is rent, this he is ashamed
to do: and the case is just the same, as if a man should not shrink from cutting off
a limb, but should be ashamed to join it together again. What do you say, O
man? Have you committed great injuries, and yourself been the cause of the
quarrel? Why, then, you would justly be the first to go and be reconciled, as
having yourself furnished the cause. But he did the wrong, he is the cause of the
enmity? Why then, for this reason also you must do it, that men may the more
admire you, that in addition to the former, you may get the first prize in the latter
also: as you were not the cause of the enmity, so neither of its being extended
further. Perhaps also the other, as conscious within himself of numberless evils,
is ashamed and blushes. But he is haughty? On this account above all, do not
hesitate to run and meet him: for if the ailment in him be twofold, both
haughtiness and anger, in this you have mentioned the very reason why you
ought to be the first to go to him, you that are the one in sound health, the one
who is able to see: as for him, he is in darkness: for such is anger and false pride.
But do you, who art free from these and in sound health, go to him — you the
physician, go to the sick. Does any of the physicians say, Because such an one is
sick, I do not go to him? No, this is the very reason above all why they do go,
when they see that he is not able to come to them. For of those who are able (to
come) they think less, as of persons not extremely ill, but not so of those who lie
at home sick. Or are not pride and anger, think you, worse than any illness? Is
not the one like a sharp fever, the other like a body swollen with inflammation?