limbs and bodies receiving health, and that life which was granted by the Lord, who prefigures
eternal things by temporal, and shows that it is He who is Himself able to extend both healing and
life to His handiwork, that His words concerning its [future] resurrection may also be believed; so
also at the end, when the Lord utters His voice "by the last trumpet," the dead shall be raised,
as He Himself declares: "The hour shall come, in which all the dead which are in the tombs shall
hear the voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth; those that have done good to the resurrection
of life, and those that have done evil to the resurrection of judgment."
2. Vain, therefore, and truly miserable, are those who do not choose to see what is so manifest
and clear, but shun the light of truth, blinding themselves like the tragic Îdipus. And as those who
are not practised in wrestling, when they contend with others, laying hold with a determined grasp
of some part of [their opponent's] body, really fall by means of that which they grasp, yet when
they fall, imagine that they are gaining the victory, because they have obstinately kept their hold
upon that part which they seized at the outset, and besides falling, become subjects of ridicule; so
is it with respect to that [favourite] expression of the heretics: "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God;" while taking two expressions of Paul's, without having perceived the apostle's
meaning, or examined critically the force of the terms, but keeping fast hold of the mere expressions
by themselves, they die in consequence of their influence (!"#$ %&'()), overturning as far as in
them lies the entire dispensation of God.
3. For thus they will allege that this passage refers to the flesh strictly so called, and not to
fleshly works, as I have pointed out, so representing the apostle as contradicting himself. For
immediately following, in the same Epistle, he says conclusively, speaking thus in reference to the
flesh: "For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So,
when this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying which is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O death, where is thy
victory?" Now these words shall be appropriately said at the time when this mortal and corruptible
flesh, which is subject to death, which also is pressed down by a certain dominion of death, rising
up into life, shall put on incorruption and immortality. For then, indeed, shall death be truly
vanquished, when that flesh which is held down by it shall go forth from under its dominion. And
again, to the Philippians he says: "But our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look
for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus, who shall transfigure the body of our humiliation conformable to
the body of His glory, even as He is able (ita ut possit) according to the working of His own
power." What, then, is this "body of humiliation" which the Lord shall transfigure, [so as to be]
conformed to "the body of His glory?" Plainly it is this body composed of flesh, which is indeed
humbled when it falls into the earth. Now its transformation [takes place thus], that while it is mortal