another and talk each of us into his neighbor's ear. And if we see any one else
present, we hold our peace, and draw in all we were going to say. And this is not
like men that feel confidence, but like those that are strictly on their guard. "But
these things we do (some one may say,) not to do wrong, but to escape having it
done us." Yea, for this I grieve, that living as we do among brethren, we need be
on our guard against having wrong done us; and we light up so many fires, and
set guards and out-posts! The reason is the prevalence of falsehood, the
prevalence of craft, the prevailing secession of charity, and war without truce. By
this means one may find men that feel more confidence in Gentiles (Greeks)
than in Christians. And yet, how ashamed we ought to be of this; how we ought
to weep and bewail at it! "What then, some may say, is to become of me? Such
and such an one is of ungainly temper, and vexatious." Where then is your
religion (Gr. philosophy)? Where are the laws of the Apostles, which bid us bear
one another's burdens? [Galatians 6:2] For if you have no notion of dealing well
by your brother, when are you to be able to do so by a stranger? If you have not
learned how to treat a member of your own self, when are you likely to draw to
you any from without, and to knit him to yourself? But how am I to feel? I am
vexed exceedingly almost to tears, for I could have sent forth large fountains
from my eyes [Jeremiah 9:1], as that Prophet says, seeing as I do countless
enemies upon the plain more galling than those he saw. For he said, upon seeing
the aliens coming against them, "My bowels! I am pained at my bowels."
[Jeremiah 4:19] But when I see men arrayed under one leader, yet standing
against one another, and biting and tearing their own members, some for
money's sake, and some for glory's, and others quite at random ridiculing and
mocking and wounding one another in countless ways, and corpses too worse
treated than those in war, and that it is but the bare name of the brethren that is
now left, myself feel my inability to devise any lament fitting such a catastrophe
as this! Reverence now, oh reverence, this Table whereof we all are partakers! [1
Corinthians 10:16-18] Christ, Who was slain for us, the Victim that is placed
thereon! [Hebrews 13:10] Robbers when they once partake of salt, cease to be

robbers in regard to those with whom they have partaken thereof; that table
changes their dispositions, and men fiercer than wild beasts it makes gentler than
lambs. But we though partakers of such a Table, and sharers of such food as that,
arm ourselves against one another, when we ought to arm against him who is
carrying on a war against all of us, the devil. Yet this is why we grow weaker
and he stronger every day. For we do not join to form in defence against him, but
along with him we stand against each other, and use him as a commander for
such hostile arrays, when it is he alone that we ought to be fighting with. But
now letting him pass, we bend the bow against our brethren only. What bows,
you will say? Those of the tongue and the mouth. For it is not javelins and darts
only, but words too, keener far than darts, that inflict wounds. And how shall we
be able to bring this war to an issue? One will ask. If you perceive that when you
speak ill of your brother, you are casting up mire out of your mouth, if you
perceive that it is a member of Christ that you are slandering, that you are eating
up your own flesh [Psalm 27:2], that you are making the judgment set for you
more bitter (fearful and uncorrupt as it is), that the shaft is killing not him that is
smitten, but yourself that shot it forth.
But he did you some wrong, maybe, and injured you? Groan at it, and do
not rail. Weep, not for the wrong done you, but for his perdition, as your Master
also wept at Judas, not because Himself was to be crucified, but because he was
a traitor. Has he insulted you and abused you? Beseech God for him, that He
may speedily become appeased toward him. He is your brother, he is a member
of you, the fruit of the same pangs as yourself, he has been invited to the same
Table. But he only makes fresh assaults upon me, it may be said. Then is your
reward all the greater for this. On this ground then there is the best reason for
abating one's anger, since it is a mortal wound that he has received, since the
devil has wounded him. Do not thou then give a further blow, nor cast yourself
down together with him. For so long as you stand you have the means of saving
him also. But if you dash yourself down by insulting deeds in return, who is then
to lift you both up? Will he that is wounded? Nay, for he cannot, now that he is