No to the new idolatry of money

55. One cause of this situation is found in our relationship with money, since we calmly accept its
dominion over ourselves and our societies. The current financial crisis can make us overlook the
fact that it originated in a profound human crisis: the denial of the primacy of the human person!
We have created new idols. The worship of the ancient golden calf (cf. Ex 32:1-35) has returned in
a new and ruthless guise in the idolatry of money and the dictatorship of an impersonal economy
lacking a truly human purpose. The worldwide crisis affecting finance and the economy lays bare
their imbalances and, above all, their lack of real concern for human beings; man is reduced to
one of his needs alone: consumption.

56. While the earnings of a minority are growing exponentially, so too is the gap separating the
majority from the prosperity enjoyed by those happy few. This imbalance is the result of ideologies
which defend the absolute autonomy of the marketplace and financial speculation. Consequently,

they reject the right of states, charged with vigilance for the common good, to exercise any form of
control. A new tyranny is thus born, invisible and often virtual, which unilaterally and relentlessly
imposes its own laws and rules. Debt and the accumulation of interest also make it difficult for
countries to realize the potential of their own economies and keep citizens from enjoying their real
purchasing power. To all this we can add widespread corruption and self-serving tax evasion,
which have taken on worldwide dimensions. The thirst for power and possessions knows no limits.
In this system, which tends to devour everything which stands in the way of increased profits,
whatever is fragile, like the environment, is defenseless before the interests of a deified market,
which become the only rule.

No to a financial system which rules rather than serves

57. Behind this attitude lurks a rejection of ethics and a rejection of God. Ethics has come to be
viewed with a certain scornful derision. It is seen as counterproductive, too human, because it
makes money and power relative. It is felt to be a threat, since it condemns the manipulation and
debasement of the person. In effect, ethics leads to a God who calls for a committed response
which is outside the categories of the marketplace. When these latter are absolutized, God can
only be seen as uncontrollable, unmanageable, even dangerous, since he calls human beings to
their full realization and to freedom from all forms of enslavement. Ethics – a non-ideological ethics
– would make it possible to bring about balance and a more humane social order. With this in
mind, I encourage financial experts and political leaders to ponder the words of one of the sages
of antiquity: “Not to share one’s wealth with the poor is to steal from them and to take away their
livelihood. It is not our own goods which we hold, but theirs”.