FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.5.

fitting good for himself, is right and natural; but it is inordinate selflove, leading to contempt of God, that Augustine (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28)
reckons to be the cause of sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Concupiscence, whereby a man desires good
for himself, is reduced to self-love as to its cause, as stated.
Reply to Objection 3: Man is said to love both the good he desires
for himself, and himself to whom he desires it. Love, in so far as it is
directed to the object of desire (e.g. a man is said to love wine or
money) admits, as its cause, fear which pertains to avoidance of evil:
for every sin arises either from inordinate desire for some good, or
from inordinate avoidance of some evil. But each of these is reduced
to self-love, since it is through loving himself that man either desires
good things, or avoids evil things.
Reply to Objection 4: A friend is like another self (Ethic. ix):
wherefore the sin which is committed through love for a friend,
seems to be committed through self-love.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether concupiscence of the flesh,

concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life are fittingly
described as causes of sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that "concupiscence of the flesh,
concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life" are unfittingly
described as causes of sin. Because, according to the Apostle (1
Tim. 6:10), "covetousness is the root of all evils." Now pride of life is
not included in covetousness. Therefore it should not be reckoned
among the causes of sin.
Objection 2: Further, concupiscence of the flesh is aroused chiefly
by what is seen by the eyes, according to Dan. 13:56: "Beauty hath
deceived thee." Therefore concupiscence of the eyes should not be
condivided with concupiscence of the flesh.
Objection 3: Further, concupiscence is desire for pleasure, as stated
above (Question 30, Article 2). Now objects of pleasure are perceived
not only by the sight, but also by the other senses. Therefore
"concupiscence of the hearing" and of the other senses should also
have been mentioned.
Objection 4: Further, just as man is induced to sin, through
inordinate desire of good things, so is he also, through inordinate
avoidance of evil things, as stated above (Article 4, ad 3). But
nothing is mentioned here pertaining to avoidance of evil. Therefore
the causes of sin are insufficiently described.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Jn. 2:16): "All that is in the world is
concupiscence of the flesh, or pride of life." Now a thing is said to be
"in the world" by reason of sin: wherefore it is written (1 Jn. 5:19):
"The whole world is seated in wickedness." Therefore these three
are causes of sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 4), inordinate self-love is the
cause of every sin. Now self-love includes inordinate desire of good:
for a man desires good for the one he loves. Hence it is evident that
inordinate desire of good is the cause of every sin. Now good is, in
two ways, the object of the sensitive appetite, wherein are the
passions which are the cause of sin: first, absolutely, according as it
is the object of the concupiscible part; secondly, under the aspect of