On the contrary, It is written (Is. 40:31): "They shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint"; and (Wis. 3:7): "(The just) shall
run to and fro like sparks among the reeds." Therefore there will be
some movement in glorified bodies.
I answer that, It is necessary to suppose that the glorified bodies are
moved sometimes, since even Christ's body was moved in His
ascension, and likewise the bodies of the saints, which will arise
from the earth, will ascend to the empyrean. But even after they have
climbed the heavens, it is likely that they will sometimes move
according as it pleases them; so that by actually putting into practice
that which is in their power, they may show forth the excellence of
Divine wisdom, and that furthermore their vision may be refreshed
by the beauty of the variety of creatures, in which God's wisdom will
shine forth with great evidence: for sense can only perceive that
which is present, although glorified bodies can perceive from a
greater distance than non-glorified bodies. And yet movement will
nowise diminish their happiness which consists in seeing God, for
He will be everywhere present to them; thus Gregory says of the
angels (Hom. xxxiv in Evang.) that "wherever they are sent their
course lies in God."
Reply to Objection 1: Local movement changes nothing that is
intrinsic to a thing, but only that which is without namely place.
Hence that which is moved locally is perfect as to those things which
are within (Phys. viii, 7), although it has an imperfection as to place,
because while it is in one place it is in potentiality with regard to
another place, since it cannot be in several places at the same time,
for this belongs to God alone. But this defect is not inconsistent with
the perfection of glory, as neither is the defect whereby a creature is
formed from nothing. Hence such like defects will remain in glorified
bodies.
Reply to Objection 2: A person is said to need a thing in two ways,
namely absolutely and relatively. One needs absolutely that without
which one cannot retain one's being or one's perfection: and thus
movement in glorified bodies will not be on account of a need,
because their happiness will suffice them for all such things. But we
need a thing relatively when without it some end we have in view
cannot be obtained by us, or not so well, or not in some particular
way. It is thus that movement will be in the blessed on account of
need, for they will be unable to show forth their motive power

practically, unless they be in motion, since nothing prevents a need
of this kind being in glorified bodies.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument would prove if the glorified body
were unable even without movement to share the Divine goodness
much more perfectly than the heavenly bodies, which is untrue.
Hence glorified bodies will be moved, not in order to gain a perfect
participation in the Divine goodness (since they have this through
glory), but in order to show the soul's power. On the other hand, the
movement of the heavenly bodies could not show their power,
except the power they have in moving lower bodies to generation
and corruption, which is not becoming to that state. Hence the
argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 4: Local movement takes nothing away from the
stability of the soul that is established in God, since it does not
affect that which is intrinsic to a thing, as stated above (ad 1).
Reply to Objection 5: The fitting place assigned to each glorified
body according to the degree of its dignity belongs to the accidental
reward. Nor does it follow that this reward is diminished whenever
the body is outside its place; because that place pertains to reward,
not as actually containing the body located therein (since nothing
flows therefrom into the glorified body, but rather does it receive
splendor therefrom), but as being due to merits. Wherefore, though
out of that place, they will still continue to rejoice in it.