doubt after as to his priesthood? But if you would see the sacrifice also, lo, here
a twofold one. For he offered a son, he offered also a ram, yea, more and above
all, his own will. And with the blood of the lamb he consecrated his right hand ,
with the sacrifice of his son, his soul. Thus was he ordained a priest, by the
blood of his only-begotten, by the sacrifice of a lamb; for the priests also were
consecrated by the blood of the victims which were offered to God. Would you
see the prophet also? It is written, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day,
and he saw it, and was glad." [Leviticus 8; John 8:56]
So also art you yourself made king and priest and prophet in the Laver; a
king, having dashed to earth all the deeds of wickedness and slain your sins; a
priest, in that you offer yourself to God, having sacrificed your body and being
yourself slain also, "for if we died with Him," says he, "we shall also live with
Him;" [2 Timothy 2:11] a prophet, knowing what shall be, and being inspired of
God , and sealed. For as upon soldiers a seal, so is also the Spirit put upon the
faithful. And if you desert, you are manifest [by it] to all. For the Jews had
circumcision for a seal, but we, the earnest of the Spirit. Knowing then all this,
and considering our high estate, let us exhibit a life worthy of the grace , that we
may obtain also the kingdom to come; which may we all obtain through the
grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever, and
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 4 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 1:23
But I call God for a witness upon my soul, that to spare you I forbare to
come unto Corinth.
What do you say, O blessed Paul? To spare them you came not to Corinth?
Surely you present us with something of a contradiction. For a little above you
said that thou therefore camest not, because you purpose not according to the
flesh nor art your own master, but art led about every where by the authority of
the Spirit, and set forth your afflictions. But here you say it was your own act
that you came not, and not from the authority of the Spirit; for he says, "To spare
you I forbare to come to Corinth." What then is one to say? Either, that this too
was itself of the Spirit, and that he himself wished to come but the Spirit
suggested to him not to do so, urging the motive of sparing them; or else, that he
is speaking of some other coming, and would signify that before he wrote the
former Epistle he was minded to come, and for love's sake restrained himself lest
he should find them yet unamended. Perhaps also, after the second Epistle
though the Spirit no longer forbade him to go, he involuntarily stayed away for
this reason. And this suspicion is the more probable, that in the first instance the
Spirit forbade him: but afterwards upon his own conviction also that this was
more advisable, he stayed away.
And observe, I pray you, how he remembers again his own custom, (which
I shall never cease to observe,) of making what seems against him tell in his
favor. For since it was natural for them to respect this and say, 'It was because
you hated us, you would not come unto us,' he shows on the contrary, that the
cause for which he would not come was that he loved them.
What is the expression, "to spare you?" I heard, he says, that some among