Reply to Objection 1: The appetitive powers accompany the
apprehensive, and in this sense Damascene says that free-will
straightway accompanies the rational power.
Reply to Objection 2: Judgment, as it were, concludes and
terminates counsel. Now counsel is terminated, first, by the
judgment of reason; secondly, by the acceptation of the appetite:
whence the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 3) says that, "having formed a
judgment by counsel, we desire in accordance with that counsel."
And in this sense choice itself is a judgment from which free-will
takes its name.
Reply to Objection 3: This comparison which is implied in the choice
belongs to the preceding counsel, which is an act of reason. For
though the appetite does not make comparisons, yet forasmuch as it
is moved by the apprehensive power which does compare, it has
some likeness of comparison by choosing one in preference to
another.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether free-will is a power distinct from the will?

Objection 1: It would seem that free-will is a power distinct from the
will. For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 22) that thelesis is one
thing and boulesis another. But thelesis is the will, while boulesis
seems to be the free-will, because boulesis, according to him, is will
as concerning an object by way of comparison between two things.
Therefore it seems that free-will is a distinct power from the will.
Objection 2: Further, powers are known by their acts. But choice,
which is the act of free-will, is distinct from the act of willing,
because "the act of the will regards the end, whereas choice regards
the means to the end" (Ethic. iii, 2). Therefore free-will is a distinct
power from the will.
Objection 3: Further, the will is the intellectual appetite. But in the
intellect there are two powers---the active and the passive. Therefore,
also on the part of the intellectual appetite, there must be another
power besides the will. And this, seemingly, can only be free-will.
Therefore free-will is a distinct power from the will.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 14) free-will is
nothing else than the will.
I answer that, The appetitive powers must be proportionate to the
apprehensive powers, as we have said above (Question 64, Article
2). Now, as on the part of the intellectual apprehension we have
intellect and reason, so on the part of the intellectual appetite we
have will, and free-will which is nothing else but the power of choice.
And this is clear from their relations to their respective objects and
acts. For the act of "understanding" implies the simple acceptation
of something; whence we say that we understand first principles,
which are known of themselves without any comparison. But to
"reason," properly speaking, is to come from one thing to the
knowledge of another: wherefore, properly speaking, we reason
about conclusions, which are known from the principles. In like
manner on the part of the appetite to "will" implies the simple
appetite for something: wherefore the will is said to regard the end,
which is desired for itself. But to "choose" is to desire something for
the sake of obtaining something else: wherefore, properly speaking,
it regards the means to the end. Now, in matters of knowledge, the