some of them even by name, and have had many histories to tell, and many
houses to show you, which have received for masters the enemies of those who
labored for them: nay not houses only, but slaves also and the whole inheritance
have oftentimes come round to enemies. For such are things human.
But in Heaven there is nothing of this to fear—lest after a man is dead, his
enemy should come, and succeed to his inheritance. For there there is neither
death nor enmity; the tabernacles of the saints are permanent abodes; and among
those saints is exultation, joy, gladness. For "the voice of rejoicing" (it is said) is
"in the tabernacles of the righteous." [Psalm 118:15] They are eternal, having no
end. They do not fall down through age, they do not change their owners, but
stand continually in their best estate. With good reason. For there is nothing
corruptible, nor perishable there, but all is immortal, and undefiled. On this
building let us exhaust all our wealth. We have no need of carpenters nor of
laborers. The hands of the poor build such houses; the lame, the blind, the
maimed, they build those houses. And wonder not, since they procure even a
kingdom for us, and give us confidence towards God.
7. For mercifulness is as it were a most excellent art, and a protector of
those who labor at it. For it is dear to God, and ever stands near Him readily
asking favor for whomsoever it will, if only it be not wronged by us; And it is
wronged, when we do it by extortion. (See p. 481.) So, if it be pure, it gives great
confidence to those who offer it up. It intercedes even for those who have
offended, so great is its power, even for those who have sinned. It breaks the
chains, disperses the darkness, quenches the fire, kills the worm, drives away the
gnashing of teeth. The gates of heaven open to it with great security: And as
when a Queen is entering, no one of the guards stationed at the doors dares to
inquire who she is, and whence, but all straightway receive her; so also indeed
with mercifulness. For she is truly a queen indeed, making men like God. For, he
says, "you shall be merciful, as your Heavenly Father is merciful." [Luke 6:36]
She is winged and buoyant, having golden pinions, with a flight which
greatly delights the angels. There, it is said, are "the wings of a dove covered

with silver, and her back with the yellowness of gold." [Psalm 68:13] As some
dove golden and living, she flies, with gentle look, and mild eye. Nothing is
better than that eye. The peacock is beautiful, but in comparison of her, is a
jackdaw. So beautiful and worthy of admiration is this bird. She continually
looks upwards; she is surrounded abundantly with God's glory: she is a virgin
with golden wings, decked out, with a fair and mild countenance. She is winged,
and buoyant, standing by the royal throne. When we are judged, she suddenly
flies in, and shows herself, and rescues us from punishment, sheltering us with
her own wings.
God would have her rather than sacrifices. Much does He discourse
concerning her: so He loves her. "He will relieve" (it is said) "the widow" and
"the fatherless" [Psalm 146:9] and the poor. God wishes to be called from her.
"The Lord is pitiful and merciful, long-suffering, and of great mercy" [Psalm
145:8], and true. The mercy of God is over all the earth. She has saved the race
of mankind [see Psalm 145:9]: For unless she had pitied us, all things would
have perished. "When we were enemies" [see Romans 5:10], she "reconciled" us,
she wrought innumerable blessings; she persuaded the Son of God to become a
slave, and to empty Himself [of His glory]. [Philippians 2:7]
Let us earnestly emulate her by whom we have been saved; let us love her,
let us prize her before wealth, and apart from wealth, let us have a merciful soul.
Nothing is so characteristic of a Christian, as mercy. There is nothing which both
unbelievers and all men so admire, as when we are merciful. For oftentimes we
are ourselves also in need of this mercy, and say to God "Have mercy upon us,
after Your great goodness." [Psalm 51:1] Let us begin first ourselves: or rather it
is not we that begin first. For He has Himself already shown His mercy towards
us: yet at least let us follow second. For if men have mercy on a merciful man,
even if he has done innumerable wrongs, much more does God.
8. Hear the prophet saying, "But I" (his words are) "am like a fruitful olive
tree in the house of God." [Psalm 52:8] Let us become such: let us become "as
an olive tree": let us be laden on every side with the commandments. For it is not