for when we perform some good work, and such as beseems those who do
anything "with trembling," then only do we rejoice. "Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling": he says not "work," but "work out," i.e. with
much earnestness, with much diligence; but as he had said, "with fear and
trembling," see how he relieves their anxiety: for what does he say? "It is God
that works in you." Fear not because I said, "with fear and trembling." I said it
not with this view, that you should give up in despair, that you should suppose
virtue to be somewhat difficult to be attained, but that you might be led to follow
after it, and not spend yourself in vain pursuits; if this be the case, God will work
all things. Do thou be bold; "for it is God that works in you." If then He works, it
is our part to bring a mind ever resolute, clenched and unrelaxed. "For it is God
that works in you both to will and to work." "If He does Himself work in us to
will, how do you exhort us? For if He works Himself even the will, the words,
which you speak to us, have no meaning, 'that you have obeyed'; for we have not
'obeyed'; it is without meaning that you say, 'with fear and trembling'; for the
whole is of God." It was not for this that I said to you, "for it is He that works in
you both to will and to work," but my object was to relieve your anxiety. If you
will, in that case He will "work in you to will." Be not affrighted, you are not
worsted; both the hearty desire and the accomplishment are a gift from Him: for
where we have the will, thenceforward He will increase our will. For instance, I
desire to do some good work: He has wrought the good work itself, and by
means of it He has wrought also the will. Or he says this in the excess of his
piety, as when he declares that our well-doings are gifts of grace.
As then, when he calls these gifts, he does not put us out of the pale of free
will, but accords to us free will, so when he says, "to work in us to will," he does
not deprive us of free will, but he shows that by actually doing right we greatly
increase our heartiness in willing. For as doing comes of doing, so of not doing
comes not doing. Have you given an alms? You are the more incited to give.
Have you refused to give? You have become so much the more disinclined. Have
you practiced temperance for one day? You have an incitement for the next

likewise. Have you indulged to excess? You have increased the inclination to
self-indulgence. "When a wicked man comes into the depth of vice, then he
despises." [Proverbs 18:3] As, then, when a man comes into the depth of
iniquity, he turns a despiser; so when he comes into the depth of goodness, he
quickens his exertions. For as the one runs riot in despair, so the second, under a
sense of the multitude of good things, exerts himself the more, fearing lest he
should lose the whole. "For His good pleasure," he says, that is, "for love's
sake," for the sake of pleasing Him; to the end that what is acceptable to Him
may take place; that things may take place according to His will. Here he shows,
and makes it a ground of confidence, that He is sure to work in us, for it is His
will that we live as He desires we should, and if He desires it, He Himself both
works in us to this end, and will certainly accomplish it; for it is His will that we
live aright. Do you see, how he does not deprive us of free will?
"Do all things without murmurings and disputings." The devil, when he
finds that he has no power to withdraw us from doing right, wishes to spoil our
reward by other means. For he has taken occasion to insinuate pride or vainglory,
or if none of these things, then murmuring, or, if not this, misgivings. Now then
see how Paul sweeps away all these. He said on the subject of humility all that
he did say, to overthrow pride; he spoke of vainglory, that is, "not as in my
presence only"; he here speaks of "murmuring and disputing." But why, I want
to know, when in the case of the Corinthians he was engaged in uprooting this
evil tendency, did he remind them of the Israelites, but here has said nothing of
the sort, but simply charged them? Because in that case the mischief was already
done, for which reason there was need of a more severe stroke and a sharper
rebuke; but here he is giving admonitions to prevent its being done. Severe
measures then were not called for in order to secure those that had not yet been
guilty; as in leading them to humility he did not subjoin the instance in the
Gospel, wherein the proud were punished, but laid the charge as from God's lips;
[Luke 16:23 and 18:14] and he addresses them as free, as children of pure birth,
not as servants; for in the practice of virtue a rightminded and generous person is