THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.7.

(Article 5), the power of Christ's Passion is united to us by faith and
the sacraments, but in different ways; because the link that comes
from faith is produced by an act of the soul; whereas the link that
comes from the sacraments, is produced by making use of exterior
things. Now nothing hinders that which is subsequent in point of
time, from causing movement, even before it exists in reality, in so
far as it pre-exists in an act of the soul: thus the end, which is
subsequent in point of time, moves the agent in so far as it is
apprehended and desired by him. On the other hand, what does not
yet actually exist, does not cause movement if we consider the use
of exterior things. Consequently, the efficient cause cannot in point
of time come into existence after causing movement, as does the
final cause. It is therefore clear that the sacraments of the New Law
do reasonably derive the power of justification from Christ's
Passion, which is the cause of man's righteousness; whereas the
sacraments of the Old Law did not.
Nevertheless the Fathers of old were justified by faith in Christ's
Passion, just as we are. And the sacraments of the old Law were a
kind of protestation of that faith, inasmuch as they signified Christ's
Passion and its effects. It is therefore manifest that the sacraments
of the Old Law were not endowed with any power by which they
conduced to the bestowal of justifying grace: and they merely
signified faith by which men were justified.
Reply to Objection 1: The Fathers of old had faith in the future
Passion of Christ, which, inasmuch as it was apprehended by the
mind, was able to justify them. But we have faith in the past Passion
of Christ, which is able to justify, also by the real use of sacramental
things as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: That sanctification was but a figure: for they
were said to be sanctified forasmuch as they gave themselves up to
the Divine worship according to the rite of the Old Law, which was
wholly ordained to the foreshadowing of Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 3: There have been many opinions about
Circumcision. For, according to some, Circumcision conferred no
grace, but only remitted sin. But this is impossible; because man is
not justified from sin save by grace, according to Rm. 3:24: "Being
justified freely by His grace."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.7.

Wherefore others said that by Circumcision grace is conferred, as to
the privative effects of sin, but not as to its positive effects. But this
also appears to be false, because by Circumcision, children received
the faculty of obtaining glory, which is the ultimate positive effect of
grace. Moreover, as regards the order of the formal cause, positive
effects are naturally prior to privative effects, though according to
the order of the material cause, the reverse is the case: for a form
does not exclude privation save by informing the subject.
Hence others say that Circumcision conferred grace also as regards
a certain positive effect, i.e. by making man worthy of eternal life, but
not so as to repress concupiscence which makes man prone to sin.
And so at one time it seemed to me. But if the matter be considered
carefully, this too appears to be untrue; because the very least grace
is sufficient to resist any degree of concupiscence, and to merit
eternal life.
And therefore it seems better to say that Circumcision was a sign of
justifying faith: wherefore the Apostle says (Rm. 4:11) that Abraham
"received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the justice of faith."
Consequently grace was conferred in Circumcision in so far as it
was a sign of Christ's future Passion, as will be made clear further
on (Question 70, Article 4).