SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.2.

himself by oath, such an adjuration is unlawful, because he usurps
over another a power which he has not. But superiors may bind their
inferiors by this kind of adjuration, if there be need for it.
If, however, he merely intend, through reverence of the Divine name
or of some holy thing, to obtain something from the other man
without putting him under any obligation, such an adjuration may be
lawfully employed in respect of anyone.
Reply to Objection 1: Origen is speaking of an adjuration whereby a
man intends to put another under an obligation, in the same way as
he would bind himself by oath: for thus did the high-priest presume
to adjure our Lord Jesus Christ [Mt. 26:63].
Reply to Objection 2: This argument considers the adjuration which
imposes an obligation.
Reply to Objection 3: To adjure is not to induce a man to swear, but
to employ terms resembling an oath in order to provoke another to
do a certain thing.
Moreover, we adjure God in one way and man in another; because
when we adjure a man we intend to alter his will by appealing to his
reverence for a holy thing: and we cannot have such an intention in
respect of God Whose will is immutable. If we obtain something from
God through His eternal will, it is due, not to our merits, but to His
goodness.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is lawful to adjure the demons?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to adjure the demons. Origen
says (Tract. xxxv, super Matth.): "To adjure the demons is not
accordance with the power given by our Saviour: for this is a Jewish
practice." Now rather than imitate the rites of the Jews, we should
use the power given by Christ. Therefore it is not lawful to adjure the
demons.
Objection 2: Further, many make use of necromantic incantations
when invoking the demons by something Divine: and this is an
adjuration. Therefore, if it be lawful to adjure the demons, it is lawful
to make use of necromantic incantations, which is evidently false.
Therefore the antecedent is false also.
Objection 3: Further, whoever adjures a person, by that very fact
associates himself with him. Now it is not lawful to have fellowship
with the demons, according to 1 Cor. 10:20, "I would not that you
should be made partakers with devils." Therefore it is not lawful to
adjure the demons.
On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 16:17): "In My name they shall cast
out devils." Now to induce anyone to do a certain thing for the sake
of God's name is to adjure. Therefore it is lawful to adjure the
demons.
I answer that, As stated in the preceding article, there are two ways
of adjuring: one by way of prayer or inducement through reverence
of some holy thing: the other by way of compulsion. In the first way
it is not lawful to adjure the demons because such a way seems to
savor of benevolence or friendship, which it is unlawful to bear
towards the demons. As to the second kind of adjuration, which is
by compulsion, we may lawfully use it for some purposes, and not
for others. For during the course of this life the demons are our
adversaries: and their actions are not subject to our disposal but to
that of God and the holy angels, because, as Augustine says (De
Trin. iii, 4), "the rebel spirit is ruled by the just spirit." Accordingly we
may repulse the demons, as being our enemies, by adjuring them
through the power of God's name, lest they do us harm of soul or
body, in accord with the Divine power given by Christ, as recorded
by Lk. 10:19: "Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents