Hebrews 1:10-12
3. And again he says [Hebrews 1:10-12]: "You Lord in the beginning hast
laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of Your hands.
They shall perish, but You remain, and they shall all wax old as a garment, and
as a vesture shall You fold them up, and they shall be changed: but You are the
same and Your years shall not fail."
Lest hearing the words, "and when He brings in the First-Begotten into the
world"; you should think it as it were a Gift afterwards super-added to Him;
above, he both corrected this beforehand, and again further corrects, saying, "in
the beginning": not now, but from the first. See again he strikes both Paul of
Samosata and also Arius a mortal blow, applying to the Son the things which
relate to the Father. And withal he has also intimated another thing by the way,
greater even than this. For surely he has incidentally pointed out also the
transfiguration of the world, saying, "they shall wax old as a garment, and as a
vesture You shall fold them up, and they shall be changed." Which also he says
in the Epistle to the Romans, that he shall transfigure the world. [See Romans
8:21] And showing the facility thereof, he adds, as if a man should fold up a
garment so shall He both fold up and change it. But if He with so much ease
works the transfiguration and the creation to what is better and more perfect,
needed He another for the inferior creation? How far does your shamelessness
go? At the same time too this is a very great consolation, to know that things will
not be as they are, but they all shall receive change, and all shall be altered, but
He Himself remains ever existing, and living without end: "and Your years," he
says, "shall not fail."

Hebrews 1:13
4. "But to which of the Angels said He at any time, Sit on My right hand
until I make your enemies your footstool?" Behold, again he encourages them,
inasmuch as their enemies were to be worsted, and their enemies are the same
also with Christ's.
This again belongs to Sovereignty, to Equal Dignity, to Honor and not
weakness, that the Father should be angry for the things done to the Son. This
belongs to His great Love and honor towards the Son, as of a father towards a
son. For He that is angry in His behalf how is He a stranger to Him? Which also
he says in the second Psalm, "He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to
scorn, and the Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall He speak unto them
in His wrath, and vex them in His sore displeasure." [Psalm 2:4-5] And again He
Himself says, "Those that would not that I should reign over them, bring hither
before Me, and slay them." [Luke 19:27] For that they are His own words, hear
also what He says in another place, "How often would I have gathered your
children together, and you would not! Behold, your house is left desolate." [Luke
13:34-35] And again, "The kingdom shall be taken from you, and shall be given
to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof." [Matthew 21:43] And again, "He
that falls upon that stone shall be broken, but on whomsoever It shall fall, It will
grind him to powder." [Matthew 21:44] And besides, He who is to be their Judge
in that world, much more did He Himself repay them in this. So that the words
"Till I make your enemies your footstool" are expressive of honor only towards
the Son.