suffer them to do; it is difficult, nay, impossible, for man to search out,
unless through that gift of God which the apostle mentions when he says,
"To another the discerning of spirits." For we know that a man can walk,
yet that he cannot do so if he is not permitted; but that he cannot fly, even
if he be permitted. So those angels, also, are able to do certain things if
they are permitted by more powerful angels, according to the supreme
commandment of God; but cannot do certain other things, not even if
they are permitted by them; because He does not permit from whom they
have received such and such a measure of natural powers: who, even by
His angels, does not usually permit what He has given them power to be
able to do.
19. Excepting, therefore, those corporeal things which are done in the
order of nature in a perfectly usual series of times, as e.g., the rising and
setting of the stars, the generations and deaths of animals, the
innumerable diversities of seeds and buds, the vapors and the clouds, the
snow and the rain, the lightnings and the thunder, the thunderbolts and
the hail, the winds and the fire, cold and heat, and all like things;
excepting also those which in the same order of nature occur rarely, such
as eclipses, unusual appearances of stars, and monsters, and
earthquakes, and such like;—all these, I say, are to be excepted, of which
indeed the first and chief cause is only the will of God; whence also in the
Psalm, when some things of this kind had been mentioned, "Fire and hail,
snow and vapor, stormy wind," lest any one should think those to be
brought about either by chance or only from corporeal causes, or even
from such as are spiritual, but exist apart from the will of God, it is added
immediately, "fulfilling His word."

### CHAP. 10.—IN HOW MANY WAYS THE CREATURE IS TO BE TAKEN BY WAY OF SIGN. THE EUCHARIST.

Excepting, therefore, all these things as I just now said, there are some
also of another kind; which, although from the same corporeal substance,
are yet brought within reach of our senses in order to announce
something from God, and these are properly called miracles and signs;
yet is not the person of God Himself assumed in all things which are
announced to us by the Lord God. When, however, that person is
assumed, it is sometimes made manifest as an angel; sometimes in that

form which is not an angel in his own proper being, although it is ordered
and ministered by an angel. Again, when it is assumed in that form which
is not an angel in his own proper being; sometimes in this case it is a
body itself already existing, assumed after some kind of change, in order
to make that message manifest; sometimes it is one that comes into being
for the purpose, and that being accomplished, is discarded. Just as, also,
when men are the messengers, sometimes they speak the words of God in
their own person, as when it is premised, "The Lord said," or, "Thus saith
the Lord," or any other such phrase, but sometimes without any such
prefix, they take upon themselves the very person of God, as e.g.: "I will
instruct thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shalt go:" so, not
only in word, but also in act, the signifying of the person of God is
imposed upon the prophet, in order that he may bear that person in the
ministering of the prophecy; just as he, for instance, bore that person who
divided his garment into twelve parts, and gave ten of them to the servant
of King Solomon, to the future king of Israel.6 Sometimes, also, a thing
which was not a prophet in his own proper self, and which existed already
among earthly things, was assumed in order to signify this; as Jacob,
when he had seen the dream, upon waking up did with the stone, which
when asleep he had under his head. Sometimes a thing is made in the
same kind, for the mere purpose; so as either to continue a little while in
existence, as that brazen serpent was able to do which was lifted up in the
wilderness,8 and as written records are able to do likewise; or so as to
pass away after having accomplished its ministry, as the bread made for
the purpose is consumed in the receiving of the sacrament.
20. But because these things are known to men, in that they are done by
men, they may well meet with reverence as being holy things, but they
cannot cause wonder as being miracles. And therefore those things which
are done by angels are the more wonderful to us, in that they are more
difficult and more unknown; but they are known and easy to them as
being their own actions. An angel speaks in the person of God to man,
saying, "I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,and the God of
Jacob;" the Scripture having said just before, "The angel of the Lord
appeared to him." And a man also speaks in the person of God, saying,
"Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee, O Israel: I am the Lord
thy God." A rod was taken to serve as a sign, and was changed into a