SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether vengeance should be taken on those

who have sinned involuntarily?
Objection 1: It seems that vengeance should be taken on those who
have sinned involuntarily. For the will of one man does not follow
from the will of another. Yet one man is punished for another,
according to Ex. 20:5, "I am . . . God . . . jealous, visiting the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation." Thus for the sin of Cham, his son Chanaan was curse
(Gn. 9:25) and for the sin of Giezi, his descendants were struck with
leprosy (4 Kgs. 5). Again the blood of Christ lays the descendants of
the Jews under the ban of punishment, for they said (Mt. 27:25): "His
blood be upon us and upon our children." Moreover we read (Josue
7) that the people of Israel were delivered into the hands of their
enemies for the sin of Achan, and that the same people were
overthrown by the Philistines on account of the sin of the sons of
Heli (1 Kgs. 4). Therefore a person is to be punished without having
deserved it voluntarily.
Objection 2: Further, nothing is voluntary except what is in a man's
power. But sometimes a man is punished for what is not in his
power; thus a man is removed from the administration of the Church
on account of being infected with leprosy; and a Church ceases to
be an episcopal see on account of the depravity or evil of the people.
Therefore vengeance is taken not only for voluntary sins.
Objection 3: Further, ignorance makes an act involuntary. Now
vengeance is sometimes taken on the ignorant. Thus the children of
the people of Sodom, though they were in invincible ignorance,
perished with their parents (Gn. 19). Again, for the sin of Dathan and
Abiron their children were swallowed up together with them (Num
16). Moreover, dumb animals, which are devoid of reason, were
commanded to be slain on account of the sin of the Amalekites (1
Kgs. 15). Therefore vengeance is sometimes taken on those who
have deserved it involuntarily.
Objection 4: Further, compulsion is most opposed to voluntariness.
But a man does not escape the debt of punishment through being
compelled by fear to commit a sin. Therefore vengeance is
sometimes taken on those who have deserved it involuntarily.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.5.

Objection 5: Further Ambrose says on Lk. 5 that "the ship in which
Judas was, was in distress"; wherefore "Peter, who was calm in the
security of his own merits, was in distress about those of others."
But Peter did not will the sin of Judas. Therefore a person is
sometimes punished without having voluntarily deserved it.
On the contrary, Punishment is due to sin. But every sin is voluntary
according to Augustine (De Lib. Arb. iii; Retract. i). Therefore
vengeance should be taken only on those who have deserved it
voluntarily.
I answer that, Punishment may be considered in two ways. First,
under the aspect of punishment, and in this way punishment is not
due save for sin, because by means of punishment the equality of
justice is restored, in so far as he who by sinning has exceeded in
following his own will suffers something that is contrary to this will.
Wherefore, since every sin is voluntary, not excluding original sin, as
stated above (FS, Question 81, Article 1), it follows that no one is
punished in this way, except for something done voluntarily.
Secondly, punishment may be considered as a medicine, not only
healing the past sin, but also preserving from future sin, or
conducing to some good, and in this way a person is sometimes
punished without any fault of his own, yet not without cause.
It must, however, be observed that a medicine never removes a
greater good in order to promote a lesser; thus the medicine of the
body never blinds the eye, in order to repair the heel: yet sometimes
it is harmful in lesser things that it may be helpful in things of greater
consequence. And since spiritual goods are of the greatest
consequence, while temporal goods are least important, sometimes
a person is punished in his temporal goods without any fault of his
own. Such are many of the punishments inflicted by God in this
present life for our humiliation or probation. But no one is punished
in spiritual goods without any fault on his part, neither in this nor in
the future life, because in the latter punishment is not medicinal, but
a result of spiritual condemnation.
Reply to Objection 1: A man is never condemned to a spiritual
punishment for another man's sin, because spiritual punishment
affects the soul, in respect of which each man is master of himself.
But sometimes a man is condemned to punishment in temporal
matters for the sin of another, and this for three reasons. First,
because one man may be the temporal goods of another, and so he