God, namely generation. And thus one God the Father is declared, who is above all, and through
all, and in all. The Father is indeed above all, and He is the Head of Christ; but the Word is through
all things, and is Himself the Head of the Church; while the Spirit is in us all, and He is the living
water, which the Lord grants to those who rightly believe in Him, and love Him, and who know
that "there is one Father, who is above all, and through all, and in us all." And to these things
does John also, the disciple of the Lord, bear witness, when he speaks thus in the Gospel: "In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. This was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made." And
then he said of the Word Himself: "He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the
world knew Him not. To His own things He came, and His own people received Him not. However,
as many as did receive Him, to these gave He power to become the sons of God, to those that believe
in His name." And again, showing the dispensation with regard to His human nature, John said:
"And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." And in continuation he says, "And we
beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten by the Father, full of grace and truth." He thus
plainly points out to those willing to hear, that is, to those having ears, that there is one God, the
Father over all, and one Word of God, who is through all, by whom all things have been made; and
that this world belongs to Him, and was made by Him, according to the Father's will, and not by
angels; nor by apostasy, defect, and ignorance; nor by any power of Prunicus, whom certain of
them also call "the Mother;" nor by any other maker of the world ignorant of the Father.
3. For the Creator of the world is truly the Word of God: and this is our Lord, who in the last
times was made man, existing in this world, and who in an invisible manner contains all things
created, and is inherent in the entire creation, since the Word of God governs and arranges all
things; and therefore He came to His own in a visible manner, and was made flesh, and hung
upon the tree, that He might sum up all things in Himself. "And His own peculiar people did not
receive Him," as Moses declared this very thing among the people: "And thy life shall be hanging
before thine eyes, and thou wilt not believe thy life." Those therefore who did not receive Him
did not receive life. "But to as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons
of God." For it is He who has power from the Father over all things, since He is the Word of
God, and very man, communicating with invisible beings after the manner of the intellect, and

John i. 10, etc.

The text reads "invisiblilter," which seems clearly an error.