which I have just now said, "there was given to me a thorn;" but as priding
myself upon them and drawing to myself greater power.' Wherefore also he adds,
"That the strength of Christ may rest upon me." Here he hints at another
thing also, namely, that in proportion as the trials waxed in intensity, in the same
proportion the grace was increased and continued.

2 Corinthians 12:10
"Wherefore I take pleasure in many weaknesses." Of what sort? Tell me. "In
injuries, in persecutions, in necessities, in distresses."
Do you see how he has now revealed it in the clearest manner? For in
mentioning the species of the infirmity he spoke not of fevers, nor any return of
that sort, nor any other bodily ailment, but of "injuries, persecutions, distresses."
Do you see a single-minded soul? He longs to be delivered from those dangers;
but when he heard God's answer that this befits not, he was not only not sorry
that he was disappointed of his prayer, but was even glad. Wherefore he said, "I
take pleasure," 'I rejoice, I long, to be injured, persecuted, distressed for Christ's
sake.' And he said these things both to check those, and to raise the spirits of
these that they might not be ashamed at Paul's sufferings. For that ground was
enough to make them shine brighter than all men. Then he mentions another
reason also.
"For when I am weak, then am I strong." 'Why do you marvel that the
power of God is then conspicuous? I too am strong "then;"' for then most of all
did grace come upon him. "For as His sufferings abound, so does our
consolation abound also." [2 Corinthians 1:5]
4. Where affliction is, there is also consolation; where consolation, there is
grace also. For instance when he was thrown into the prison, then it was he
wrought those marvellous things; when he was shipwrecked and cast away upon
that barbarous country, then more than ever was he glorified. When he went
bound into the judgment-hall, then he overcame even the judge. And so it was
too in the Old Testament; by their trials the righteous flourished. So it was with
the three children, so with Daniel, with Moses, and Joseph; thence did they all
shine and were counted worthy of great crowns. For then the soul also is
purified, when it is afflicted for God's sake: it then enjoys greater assistance as

needing more help and worthy of more grace. And truly, before the reward
which is proposed to it by God, it reaps a rich harvest of good things by
becoming philosophic. For affliction rends pride away and prunes out all
listlessness and exercises unto patience: it reveals the meanness of human things
and leads unto much philosophy. For all the passions give way before it, envy,
emulation, lust, rule, desire of riches, of beauty , boastfulness, pride, anger; and
the whole remaining swarm of these distempers. And if you desire to see this in
actual working, I shall be able to show you both a single individual and a whole
people, as well under affliction as at ease; and so to teach you how great
advantage comes of the one, and how great listlessness from the other.
For the people of the Hebrews, when they were vexed and persecuted,
groaned and besought God, and drew down upon themselves great influences
from above: but when they waxed fat, they kicked. The Ninevities again, when
they were in the enjoyment of security, so exasperated God that He threatened to
pluck up the entire city from its foundations: but after they had been humbled by
that preaching, they displayed all virtue. But if you would see also a single
individual, consider Solomon. For he, when deliberating with anxiety and
trouble concerning the government of that nation, was vouchsafed that vision:
but when he was in the enjoyment of luxury, he slid into the very pit of iniquity.
And what did his father? When was he admirable and passing belief? Was it not
when he was in trials? And Absalom, was he not sober-minded, while still an
exile; but after his return, became both tyrannical and a parricide? And what did
Job? He indeed shone even in prosperity, but showed yet brighter after his
affliction. And why must one speak of the old and ancient things? For if one do
but examine our own state at present, he will see how great is the advantage of
affliction. For now indeed that we are in the enjoyment of peace, we have
become supine, and lax and have filled the Church with countless evils; but
when we were persecuted, we were more sober-minded, and kinder, and more
earnest, and more ready as to these assemblies and as to hearing. For what fire is
to gold, that is affliction unto souls; wiping away filth, rendering men clean,