we must come to something which is in itself one; and this of all things is the soul.
There must therefore in one man, or one animal, be one only soul.

## CHAPTER LIX--That the Potential Intellect of Man is not a Spirit subsisting apart from
Matter

make the stone see, but be seen. Therefore the aforesaid union does not make us
understand, but be understood. But, plainly, it is properly and truly said that man
understands: for we should not be investigating the nature of understanding were it not
for the fact that we have understanding. The above mode of union then is insufficient.
5. The intellect in the act of understanding and the object as represented in
understanding are one, as also the sense in the act of sensation and the object as
represented in sense. But the understanding as apt to understand and its object as
open to representation in understanding are not one, as neither is sense, so far as it is
apt to have sensation, one with its object, so far as that is open to be represented in
sensation. The impression made by the object, so far as it lies in images of the
phantasy, is not any representation in the understanding. Only by undergoing a process
of abstraction from such images does the impression became one with the intellect in
the act of understanding. In like manner the impression of colour is actually felt in
sense, not as it is in the stone, but as it is in the eye. Now, on the theory of Averroes,
the intelligible form, or impression in the understanding, only comes to be conjoined with
us by finding place in the images of our phantasy. Therefore it is not conjoined with us
inasmuch as it is one with the potential intellect, being its form. Therefore it cannot be
the medium whereby the potential intellect is conjoined with us: because, in so far as it
is conjoined with the potential intellect, it is not conjoined with us; and in so far as it is
conjoined with us, it is not conjoined with the potential intellect.

something here and now present.' See Father Bdder's Psychologia, pp. 71-79, who
apposite]y cites Cardinal Newman's Grammar of Assent, pp. 107 sq. See too Silvester
Maurus, Commentary on Aristotle, De anima, lib. III, cap. iv (ed. Lethielleux, Paris,
1886, tom. IV, pp. 94, 95). Aristotle tells us of this faculty that it perishes with the body,
but that its operation is an indispensable preliminary to all human understanding, ho de
pathetikos nous phthartos, kai aneu toutou outhen noei (De anima III, v, ult.) 2. Much
more important is the `potential intellect,' – intellectus possibilis, a term occurring again
and again in all the writings of the schoolmen, being founded on one word of Aristotle,
De anima III, iv, 3, med' autou einai phusin oudemian all' e tauten hoti dunaton (nor has
it any other natural property than this, that it is able, capable, potential). It is defined by
Maurus (l.c.): "the intellect inasmuch as it is capable of being [representatively] made all
things, by receiving intelligible impressions of all things." An `intelligible impression'
differs from a `sensible impression' as the universal from the particular, e.g. as the
triangle in the mind, which stands for any triangle, from the image of this particular
triangle chalked on the board and taken up by sense and phantasy. 3. Of equal
scholastic importance is the `active intellect,' intellectus agens, defined by Maurus: "The
intellect inasmuch as it is capable of [representatively] making all things, by impressing
on the potential intellect intelligible impressions of all things." The term nous poietkos
though not actually found, is implied in De anima, III, v. The `active' and `potential'
intellect together make up the understanding. The exact extent of the distinction
between them is matter of some dispute (Bdder, Psychologia, pp. 159-163). What
ordinary mortals call `intellect' or `understanding,' is the `potential intellect.' It is called
`potential' because it is open to all intellectual impressions, and, prior to experience, is
void of all impression, and has no predisposition of itself to one impression rather than
to another. This by the way seems to militate against the Kantian doctrine of intellectual
`categories,' or `forms of mind.' But it does not militate against the doctrine of heredity.
Heredity works in the body, in the domain of the sentient soul: we are here concerned
with pure intellect. Of that, Aristotle says it is "impassible [i.e., not directly acted on by
matter], yet apt to receive the intelligible impression, or form; but has no formed
impression upon it, before the process of understanding is set up." The `active intellect'
on the other hand is the act of spontaneous energy, whereby the intellect transforms the
image, sent up to it by sense and phantasy, from particular to universal, making out of it
an `intelligible impression.' A further distinction is drawn between the `intelligible
impression' (species intelligibilis impressa) thus created and received in the mind, and
the `intelligible expression' (species intelligibilis expressa), or precise act whereby the
mind understands. See Bdder, Psychologia, pp. 153-156. This distinction has been
already drawn by St Thomas (B. I, Chap.LIII). For further elucidation see Father
Maher's Psychology, pp. 304-313, ed. 4, who however speaks of intellectus patiens vel
possibilis, and takes no account of the intellectus passivus of St Thomas (B. II, Chap.