the future disquieting and confounding his pleasure. For this, too, is no light sort
of punishment; nor therefore the contrary, of enjoyment and repose. And besides
these there is a third sort. And what is this? In that the things of worldly delight
do not even while they are present appear such, being refuted both by nature and
time; but the others not only are, but also abide immovable. Do you see that we
shall be able to put not two for nothing only, but three even, and five, and ten,
and twenty, and ten thousand for nothing? But that you may learn this same truth
by an example also—the rich man and Lazarus,— the one enjoyed the things
present, the other those to come. [Luke 16:19, etc.] Seems it then to you to be
one and one, to be punished throughout all time, and to be an hungered for a
little season? To be diseased in your corruptible body, and to scorch miserably in
an undying one? To be crowned and live in undying delights after that little
sickness, and to be endlessly tormented after that short enjoyment of his goods.
And who will say this? For what will you we should compare? The quantity?
The quality? The rank? The decision of God concerning each? How long will
you utter the words of beetles that are for ever wallowing. in dung! For these are
not the words of reasoning men, to throw away a soul which is so precious for
nothing, when there needs little labor to receive heaven. Will you that I teach
you also in another way that there is an awful tribunal there? Open the doors of
your conscience, and behold the judge that sits in your heart. Now if you
condemn yourself, although a lover of yourself, and canst not refrain from
passing a righteous verdict, will not God much rather make great provision for
that which is just, and pass that impartial judgment upon all; or will He permit
everything to go on loosely and at random? And who will say this? No one; but
both Greeks and barbarians, both poets and philosophers, yea the whole race of
men in this agree with us, though differing in particulars , and affirm that there
are tribunals of some sort in Hades; so manifest and uncontroverted is the thing.
4. 'And wherefore,' says one, 'does he not punish here?' That He may
display that longsuffering of His, and may offer to us the salvation that comes by
repentance, and not make our race to be swept away, nor pluck away those who

by an excellent change are able to be saved, before that salvation. For if he
instantly punished upon the commission of sins, and destroyed, how should Paul
have been saved, how should Peter, the chief teachers of the world? How should
David have reaped the salvation that came by his repentance? How the
Galatians? How many others? For this reason then He neither exacts the penalty
from all here, (but only from some out of all,) nor yet there from all, but from
one here, and from another there; that He may both rouse those who are
exceedingly insensible by means of those whom He punishes, and may cause
them to expect the future things by those whom He punishes not. Or do you not
see many punished here, as those, for instance, who were buried under the ruins
of that tower; [Luke 13:4-7] as those whose blood Pilate mingled with their
sacrifices; as those who perished by an untimely death among the Corinthians,
because they partook unworthily of the mysteries [1 Corinthians 11:30]; as
Pharaoh; as those of the Jews who were slain by the barbarians; as many others,
both then, and now, and continually? And yet others too, having sinned in many
things, departed without suffering the penalty here; as the rich man in the story
of Lazarus; as many others. [Luke 16] Now these things He does, both to arouse
those who quite disbelieve in the things to come, and to make those who do
believe and are careless more diligent. "For God is a righteous Judge, and
strong, and longsuffering, and visits not with wrath every day." [Psalm 7:11.
Septuagint] But if we abuse His longsuffering, there will come a time when He
will no more be longsuffering even for a little, but will straightway inflict the
penalty.
Let us not then, in order that for a single moment (for such is this present
life) we may live luxuriously, draw on ourselves punishment through endless
ages: but let us toil for a moment, that we may be crowned for ever. See ye not
that even in worldly things most men act in this manner; and choose a brief toil
in order to a long rest, even though the opposite falls out unto them? For in this
life indeed there is an equal portion of toils and reward; yea, often, on the
contrary, the toil is endless while the fruit is little, or not even a little; but in the