"How long do you make us to doubt?" in order that having drawn Him out, they
might again find some handle against Him. For that in every case they
questioned Him not in order to learn, but to find fault with His words, is clear,
not from this passage only, but from many others also. Since when they came to
Him and asked, "Is it lawful to give tribute unto Cæsar or not?" [Matthew
22:17], when they spoke about putting away a wife [Matthew 19:3], when they
enquired about her who, they said, had had seven husbands [Matthew 22:23],
they were convicted of bringing their questions to Him, not from desire of
learning, but from an evil intention. But there He rebuked them, saying, "Why do
you tempt Me, you hypocrites?" showing that He knew their secret thoughts,
while here He said nothing of the kind; teaching us not always to rebuke those
who plot against us, but to bear many things with meekness and gentleness.
Since then it was a sign of folly, when the works proclaimed Him aloud, to
seek the witness of words, hear how He answers them, at once hinting to them
that they made these enquiries superfluously, and not for the sake of learning,
and at the same time showing that He uttered a voice plainer than that by words,
namely, that by works.

John 10:25
"I told you often, and you believe not: the works that I do in My Father's Name,
they are they that bear witness of Me."
2. A remark which the more tolerable among them continually made to one
another; "A man that is a sinner cannot do such miracles." And again, "A devil
cannot open the eyes of the blind": and, "No man can do such miracles except
God be with him." [John 3:2] And beholding the miracles that He did, they said,
"Is not this the Christ?" Others said, "When Christ comes, will He do greater
miracles than those which this Man has done?" [John 7:31] And these very
persons as many as then desired to believe in Him, saying, "What sign do you
show us, that we may see, and believe you?" [John 6:30] When then they who
had not been persuaded by such great works, pretended that they should be
persuaded by a bare word, He rebukes their wickedness, saying, "If you believe
not My works, how will you believe My words? So that your questioning is
superfluous."

John 10:26
"But I told you, and you believe not, because you are not of My sheep."
"For I on My part have fulfilled all that it behooved a Shepherd to do, and
if you follow Me not, it is not because I am not a Shepherd, but because you are
not My sheep."

John 10:27-30
"For My sheep hear My voice, and follow Me; and I give unto them eternal life ;
neither can any man pluck them out of My hand. The Father, which gave them
Me, is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of My Father's
hand. I and the Father are One."
Observe how in renouncing He excites them to follow Him. "You hear Me
not," He says, "for neither are you sheep, but they who follow, these are of the
flock." This He said, that they might strive to become sheep. Then by mentioning
what they should obtain, He makes these men jealous, so as to rouse them, and
cause them to desire such things.
"What then? Is it through the power of the Father that no man plucks them
away, and have you no strength, but art too weak to guard them?" By no means.
And in order that you may learn that the expression, "The Father which gave
them to Me," is used on their account, that they might not again call Him an
enemy of God, therefore, after asserting that, "No man plucks them out of My
hand," He proceeds to show, that His hand and the Father's is One. Since had not
this been so, it would have been natural for Him to say, "The Father which gave
them to Me is greater than all, and no man can pluck them out of My hand." But
He said not so, but, "out of My Father's hand." Then that you may not suppose
that He indeed is weak, but that the sheep are in safety through the power of the
Father, He adds, "I and the Father are One." As though He had said "I did not
assert that on account of the Father no man plucks them away, as though I were
too weak to keep the sheep. For I and the Father are One." Speaking here with
reference to Power, for concerning this was all His discourse; and if the power
be the same, it is clear that the Essence is also. And when the Jews used ten
thousand means, plotting and casting men out of their synagogues, He tells them
that all their contrivances are useless and vain; "For the sheep are in My Father's
hand"; as the Prophet says, "Upon My hand I have pictured your walls." [Isaiah